[Music]
around the year 1200 ad the medieval
Arab traveler and Scholar ABD Al Latif
Al Bagdad
departed from his hometown of Baghdad
and set out on a journey of
exploration as a young man al- bagdadi
had studied law medicine and philosophy
and was inspired by The Works of
classical philosophers in particular
Aristotle at the turn of the 13th
century al-baghdadi embarked on a series
of Journeys that would take him to many
of the Great cities in the region he he
traveled to mosul to Jerusalem Damascus
and Aleppo and eventually around the
year 1204 his journey took him across
the Sinai desert to the banks of the
Nile on his travels Al bagdadi wrote a
book that was part travel account and
part philosophy entitled The Book of
edification and
admonition in it he recalls the
remarkable impression that Egypt made on
him
Egypt is a land of wondrous monuments
and strange stories it consists of a
valley enclosed by two ranges of Hills
one to the East and one to the West the
Nile runs between them until it reaches
Lower Egypt where it divides into
branches all of which flow out into the
sea the Nile is unusual for it length we
know of no other River in the inhabited
world that covers a greater
distance as Al bagdadi traveled around
Egypt he was struck by the incredible
variety of ancient remains he saw great
temples of stone and tomb complexes
crumbling beside the Waters of the Nile
but none of these compared to the most
fabled of all Egypt's monuments which
rose Over the Horizon not far from the
city of Memphis at a place called
[Music]
Giza the ancient monuments in Egypt are
such as I have never seen nor heard tell
of in other lands first among them are
the pyramids they are very numerous all
are situated on the Giza side of the
Nile and extend in the direction of
Memphis spread out along a distance of
about two days journey some are big
others small some are of clay and mud
brick but most are of stone some are
stepped but most of them taper
smoothly and of all these pyramids three
stood out for their seemingly impossible
immensity
turning to the pyramids that everyone
talks about points out and characterizes
in terms of their sheer size there are
three laid out in a straight line at
Giza two of them are particularly
enormous and it is with these two that
the poets have been
infatuated the spectacle is so or
inspiring that your sight will falter as
you try to take it all
in
al- bagdadi wrote accounts of the local
people who lived close to these vast
remains he describes some who climbed to
the tops of these structures and others
who quarried them for their fine cut
stone others still became obsessed with
exploring the hidden tunnels and
Chambers that branched out beneath the
pyramids in one of the Great Pyramids
there is an open in that allows people
to gain entry it leads them into narrow
corridors labyrinthine passageways well
shafts pits and other such features as
appear in the accounts of those who
Venture inside and explore the innermost
Parts many people obsessed by the
pyramid and filled with fanciful ideas
about it are inspired to penetrate its
depths but they always end up at some
place beyond which they cannot go they
spoke of how the pyramid was full of B
bats and how these bats grow to the size
of
pigeons there are inscriptions on the
stones written in the ancient characters
that no one understands in the entire
land of Egypt I have never found a
single person who so much as claimed to
have heard of anyone who knew how to
read
them he even seems to have visited the
Sphinx nearby which was then buried up
to its neck in the sands
also by the three pyramids at a distance
from them of rather more than a bow shot
the likeness of a most enormous head and
neck protrudes from the ground the
people call it old father dread and
assert that its body is buried in the
ground the face is handsomely indeed
admirably betrayed With A Touch of
Elegance and Beauty about the features
as if a smile were playing across them
above all Al bagdadi was impressed by
the Mastery of engineering it must have
required to build such constructions and
to have them survive for such a stretch
of
[Music]
time the construction of the pyramids
was carried out according to a
methodology remarkable in respect both
to design and to Precision of
execution this what has enabled the
pyramids to endure time's passing eras
or rather it has meant that time itself
has had to endure the era of the
pyramids Noble intellects gave the
pyramids their All Pure Minds exhausted
their every effort for their sake
enlightened Souls outpoured their
loftiest capabilities on their design to
stand as exemplars that are the Pinnacle
of the possible because of this they all
but speak aloud of their Builders
telling us what sort of folk they were
giving voice to their intellects
relating the stories of their lives and
times when al- bagdadi visited Giza
around the year 1200 the Great Pyramid
was the tallest man-made structure in
the world and had been for more than
3,700 years
all that time it had testified to the
greatness of the civilization that had
grown up on the banks of the Nile a
civilization that had passed through
countless periods of flourishing and
Decay and then finally disappeared
beneath the Sands of the
[Music]
desert
my name is Paul Cooper and you're
listening to the fall of civilizations
podcast each episode I look at a
civilization of the past that Rose to
glory and then collapsed into the ashes
of History I want to ask what did they
have in common what led to their fall
and what did it feel like to be a person
alive at the time who witnessed the end
of their world in this episode I want to
tell the story of one of the most iconic
cultures ever produced by humankind the
civilizations of Egypt's Nile Valley I
want to show how this series of related
societies grew up in the flood Plains of
their Great River and built some of the
most enduring and recognizable
structures in the world I want to tell
the story of how they Rose how they
endured and how they finally faded from
history all
together the story of Egypt is one of
the greatest and longest epics in all of
history many empires would consider
themselves lucky to last through the
Reigns of 31 Kings but ancient Egypt
would see the reign of 31 dynasties of
Kings lasting for more than 3,000
years in the time since historians have
long struggled with this panoply of
rulers and eras and have tried to
wrestle the history of Egypt into neat
categories they typically split its
history into three sets of dynasties
commonly known as the Old Kingdom the
Middle Kingdom and The New
Kingdom between these are a number of
intermediate periods when the central
power of its Kings failed and the land
divided throughout this history Egypt's
Empire would EB and flow just like the
Great River that gave it life that River
was the greatest Watercourse of the
entire afrasian land mass the River
Nile the Nile Finds Its Source in Lake
Victoria the largest lake in Africa it's
a body of water about the size of the US
state of Georgia or nearly the size of
Ireland the gigantic Lake Victoria
drains into the river known as as the
White Nile which is joined by the
so-called Blue Nile further Downstream
at Kum the capital of
Sudan from there it flows for a further
2,000 km across the Nubian and Egyptian
deserts to Cairo where it branches out
into a wide Delta and empties into the
Mediterranean
Sea next to the Amazon River the Nile is
either the longest or second longest
river on
Earth it runs for 6,800 km or around a
6th of the way around the earth and its
drainage basin covers a tenth of the
entire land mass of
Africa Egypt itself has an extremely
arid climate and its Inland territories
experience virtually no
rainfall if geography had been only a
little different and late Victoria had
not begun to drain westwards we can only
imagine how differently history might
have gone for at least the last 5,000
years every blade of grass and every
tree in the Nile Valley every animal and
every person to ever live every priest
and every King owes their existence
solely to this
[Music]
River
human presence in Egypt is among the
oldest in the world after evolving in
the region of East Africa modern humans
migrated primarily along this Corridor
and from there spread to the rest of the
world the Nile is in a sense the highway
down which all of humanity has once
passed as one of our first stops along
our great journey Egypt is home to human
remains of astonishing
Antiquity stone tools worked by archaic
humans have been discovered in Nile
deposits dating to as early as 600,000
years ago and modern Homo sapiens
followed in the last 100,000 years or
so these migrations likely happened
during one of the many African humid
periods that have occurred over the last
millions of years
These are times when shifts in the
planet's climate caused rains to fall on
the Sahara Desert during these periods
the desert bloomed into a verdant
grassland home to animals and people and
when the period ended the grasses would
die the animals would leave and the
Sands would
return it's thought that this cycle has
occurred more than 200 times since the
desert first formed 8 million years
ago the earliest peoples in this region
lived by hunting and fishing and left
behind stone tools and a multitude of
rock
paintings from about the year 13,000 BC
in one of the Sahara's driest periods in
history the silian culture began
Gathering wild wheat and barley and from
there developed their own domesticated
strain
from 9,000 BC people began to weave
thread from wool and another humid
period
began one enigmatic stone circle at the
desert site of nabta pla dates to around
7,500 BC when the Sahara was a range of
rolling grasslands once
more this stone monument may have been
used to Mark the movements of stars at
different times of of the year so that
people could keep track of Cycles like
the Harvest and the migration of animals
for
hunting napapa has been called Egypt's
Stonehenge but this doesn't quite do it
justice since it was built at least
5,000 years before the first stones of
Stonehenge were ever
laid when the last ice age ended and the
Sahara once more dried up any peoples
who had been living and biring in its
grasslands would have been driven out of
their ancestral home they would have
wandered across the newly formed desert
until they reached the only stretch of
green in the midst of all that sand that
was the banks of the Nile and here they
would make their
home these peoples would build a
collection of scattered settlements
reaching up and down the river but
slowly as more and more people were
driven to to the river bank to survive
these began to coales into larger towns
cities and finally
kingdoms the ancient Egyptians referred
to the whole region by the name the two
lands referring to the long Nile Valley
in the South and the Delta that spread
out in the north close to the
Sea these were the two lands that today
we call Upper and Lower
Egypt surprisingly for a modern person
who orients their Maps facing north the
Egyptians thought of their world in the
opposite
direction as a consequence their word
for East was the same as their word for
left and West the same as right right in
the Egyptian mind they were always
facing Upstream waiting for the annual
floods to
arrive if you find this confusing as we
continue just remember that southern
Upper Egypt is the region upstream and
Northern Lower Egypt is
Downstream for many people at this time
the lands along the riverbank would have
constituted their entire
world the Egyptians referred to the
river flood plane as chemet or the black
land due to the rich dark soil left
behind by its life-giving
floods this land was the realm of the
noble god Horus who had the head of a
falcon the god of Life protection and
healing if you walked just an hour in
either direction you would soon reach
what they called desr or the Red
Land This was the inhospital bple desert
stretching out on all sides roasting hot
largely devoid of water and shade and
inhospitable to most
life these deserts were presided over by
the god Set the god of chaos and
violence the Nile itself they knew
simply by the name iteru or the river
since in their world there was no other
the Egyptian World began in Upper Egypt
far up the reaches of the Nile at a
place now known as
Aswan here a belt of hard Granite
crosses the landscape and forces the
river waters into shallow whitewater
rapids running over Boulders and through
Rocky channels called cataracts this
word comes from the Greek word
cataractes or rushing
down today the Waters of these cataracts
have been tamed by the construction of
the Aswan Dam but in ancient times they
could be a rushing torrent each year
when the floodwaters passed through this
Rocky stretch of the river they made
such a thundering sound that the Earth
itself could shake and this led the
ancient Egyptians to believe that the
waters were coming up from beneath the
Earth bursting out of vast Subterranean
Seas at Aswan they built a temple on an
island in the middle of those Rushing
Waters and here worshiped that Primal
Force the fast flowing Waters at Aswan
made it a natural barrier to ships and
prevented any further exploration up
River for this reason for much of its
early history this was where ancient
Egyptian influence ended the final
extent of their power and border of
their
empire Beyond Aswan was the southern
lands of Nubia and for this reason
Egyptians would also refer to it as the
narrow gateway to the
South the temple island in the Aswan
cataracts was known to the Egyptians as
Abu the Egyptian word for elephant since
it was a hub for the ivory trade with
these Southern lands the Greeks would
follow this example and named the place
elephantine from here trade Caravans
would pass over land South to the darur
region of Sudan bringing gold Ivory and
other Goods but north of Aswan
everything was considered to be Egypt as
Herodotus
records all all the land watered by the
Nile in its course was Egypt and all who
lived lower down than the city
elephantine and drank the river's water
were Egyptians such was the Oracle given
to
them luckily for the Egyptians the Nile
flows from the south to the north while
the prevailing winds blow in the other
direction meaning that you could use the
winds to sail against the current as far
as Aswan without too much effort
but the return Journey would be even
easier allowing the river waters to
Simply carry you
along a ship heading Downstream to the
north from Aswan would see for some time
only Rocky desert and the river barded
by Cliffs of hard Nubian
Sandstone this is not a land well suited
to agriculture but in ancient times
these valleys were sources of Natural
Resources like gemstones copper and gold
further north the Red Cliffs fall away
and the flood plane around the river
gets
wider here the landscape would have
blushed green and a larger population
could be supported it was in this region
that the desert city of Thieves would
grow up which the Egyptians called
waset this would one day become the most
powerful City in Upper Egypt the capital
of the desert
regions
the living part of an Egyptian City its
houses and markets and workshops tended
to be built on the Eastern Bank of the
river where the sun rises while the
Western Bank where the sun set was used
only for burials and
tombs sailing further north you would
reach the area we call middle Egypt and
the flood plane gets wider
still this region would have been full
of Wildlife and
vegetation some way to the west of the
river the waters divert and fill a large
Oasis known as fume which Sprouts like a
broad leaf from the stem of the
Nile in ancient times this Lake was home
to large populations of Nile crocodile
so that the settlement on the shore
would be known by the Greeks as
crocodilopolis or crocodile
City here Egyptian apparently even tamed
crocodiles in their temples as Herodotus
recounts now for some of the Egyptians
the crocodiles are sacred animals those
who dwelt about thieves and about the
lake of mois hold them to be most sacred
and each of these two peoples keep one
crocodile selected which has been
trained to tameness and they put hanging
ornaments of stone and of gold into the
ears of of these and anklets round the
front feet and they give them food
appointed and victims of sacrifices and
treat them as well as
possible in other places crocodiles were
hunted for food using ingenious but
risky
methods a man puts the back of a pig
Upon A Hook as bait and lets it go into
the middle of the river while while he
himself upon the bank of the river has a
young live Pig which he beats and the
crocodile hearing its cries makes for
the direction of the sound and when he
is drawn out to land first of all the
hunter plasters up his eyes with mud and
having done so he very easily gets the
Mastery of him but if he does not do so
he has much
trouble
also living in the river were the
animals that the Greeks would call River
horses or
hippopotamus our
hippopotamus the river horse is sacred
in districts of pemis but for the other
Egyptians it is not sacred and this is
the appearance which he presents he is
four-footed clothing hoofed like an ox
flat noosed with a man like a horse and
showing teeth like tusks with a tail and
voice like a horse and in size as large
as the largest ox and his hide is so
exceedingly thick that when it has been
dried shars of javelins are made of
it the most strategically important
location was what the Egyptians called
the balance of the two
lands this was the place Where the River
split into its
Delta as the crossroads between Upper
and Lower Egypt this was always the
natural place for the capital when the
empire was
United this location would give rise to
the city of Memphis and in turn to
Modern Cairo and it is here that the
Egyptians would build their most famous
and Lasting
monuments each year the monsoon rains
falling in the highlands of Ethiopia and
central Africa would swell the river and
the annual flood would
arrive this happened with such
regularity around the middle of August
that the Egyptians timed it using the
rising of the star
syrius in the 5ifth century BC Herodotus
wrote The Following description of these
floods when the Nile is in flood it
overflows in places as far as 2 days
journey from either Bank the Nile comes
with a rising flood for a 100 days from
the summer solers and when this tale of
days is complete it sinks again with a
diminishing stream so that the river is
low for the whole winter till the summer
solers
again the Egyptian year was divided into
three seasons the flood season of akat
the growing season of peret and the
harvest season of
Shemu once the flood waters receded in
Early Autumn the land was refreshed and
fertilized with Rich Nile mud and new
crops could be grown in this black mud
Farmers grew Emma wheat barley beans and
lentils throughout the cooler winter
season and when summer came again the
grain was ready to be
harvested Egyptian life was held in this
delicate
balance each year if the River flooded
too little or too much the results could
be devastating as one ancient Egyptian
himm to the Nile makes
clear if he is greedy the whole land
suffers
Great and Small fall moaning people are
changed at his
coming when he rises then the land is in
Joy then every belly is glad every jaw
has held
laughter since their lives depended so
greatly on these floods the Egyptians
developed ingenious systems for
measuring them at the cataracts of Aswan
they built a series of devices known as
nil omers these often take the form of
towers with deep Wells inside that allow
the river to flow in with measurements
inscribed on their walls in Egyptian
cubits each year ancient people would
anxiously check these nylers to see how
High the water was Rising that year and
whether it would be a time of famine a
time of Plenty or a time when they would
need to hastily build some flood
defenses During the period known as the
pre-dynastic era the two halves of Egypt
were divided and this division was
cultural as well as political the desert
people of Southern Upper Egypt worshiped
their own God NE
who was commonly depicted as a griffin
vulture a powerful and Majestic
bird these people were likely darker
skinned and had more of a cultural and
linguistic connection with the southern
lands of Nubia and subsaharan Africa
their rulers sometimes even
intermarrying with the royalty of
Southern kingdoms meanwhile the people
of Northern Lower Egypt paid deference
to the god waget usually shown as an
Egyptian
cobra they had more genetic influence
from North Africa and the Mediterranean
and may have been somewhat lighter
skinned the kings of Southern Upper
Egypt ruled while wearing a white
bulbous Crown while the kings of the
north wore a red crown with a spiraling
representation of a cobra emanating from
it the kingdoms that ruled over these
regions were always fluid but the
geographical distinction between Upper
and Lower Egypt always held sway but
around the year 3000 BC or more than
5,000 years ago all that began to
change that was because of a king of a
kingdom called thinus his name was
nare the figure of nare is wreathed in
mystery and what little we know about
him has been pieced together from
fragments of inscriptions and a few
significant
artifacts nare was born under the
personal name menes but chose nare as
his Horus name or King name when he came
to the throne of thinis and this name
perhaps gives us some sense of his
personality that's because nare means
something like fighting
catfish the Nile catfish that the king
clearly admired is a remarkable species
it's a predatory fish a nocturnal hunter
that can grow up to 1.2 M long or about
the size of a dolphin and uses a form of
naturally generated electricity as a
weapon using a unique organ in its body
it can generate an electric shock of up
to 350 vaults that stuns its prey in the
largest catfish this shock can be enough
to stun an adult human and the Egyptians
were fascinated by this unique property
they depicted these shock and awe
Predators on painted wall murals and
even experimented with using the weak
electric charges of young specimens as a
treatment for
arthritis we might imagine that this
King nare wanted to emulate some of the
characteristics of these surprise
Hunters but whether it was their
patience lying in wait for their enemies
the tenacity of their surprise attacks
or the shock and awe with which they
stunned their prey we may never know
virtually the only source we have for
this period is a carving known as the
nare pallet which contains only a
handful of cryptic
Clues one side of this carved artifact
shows King nare standing over a defeated
enemy gripping him by the hair in one
hand and raising a mace in the other
it's a clear sign of
domination here nare is shown wearing
the white bulbous crown of his native
Upper Egypt suggesting that he
bludgeoned his Rivals there into
submission on the other side the carving
shows the king leading an army while
ranks of his defeated enemies lie before
him below this an image of a bull is
shown tearing down the walls of a
fortress with its horns on this side of
the carving NAD is wearing the Red Crown
of Lower Egypt from this we might assume
that he set out on a campaign of
conquest and successfully brought the
two lands of Egypt together two mythical
animals carved on one side of the nare
pallet stand with their long necks
intertwined perhaps representing the
coming together of the two sides of
Egypt their lives and their Fates now
inextricably
bound this was a union that would see
the newly United Egypt grow to become
one of the most influential Societies in
early human
history at first Egyptian culture was
heavily influenced by the slightly older
civilizations of Mesopotamia like the
Sumerians Egyptian palaces were often
built to a Sumerian design and they used
Sumerian motifs in their art too but by
at least the year 3000 BC Egypt had
matured its own indigenous artistic
culture and its own system of
writing the Greeks would later refer to
these by a word which means sacred
carving or
hieroglyph the Egyptian hieroglyphs are
a mixed writing system that uses a
variety of phonetic symbols as well as a
collection of symbols that represent
whole words for example an image of a
man holding up his hand to his mouth
could be used to represent the common
word eat but other symbols that
represented groups of consonants could
be used to spell out other less common
words names or
places hieroglyphs emerged a little
after the invention of CA form in
Mesopotamia and it's possible they were
inspired by this older writing system in
Mesopotamia we can see the gradual
evolution of the ca form writing system
from its earliest symbolic Roots but in
Egypt the earliest discovered example of
hieroglyphs show the symbols springing
into existence already fully formed in a
complex system this suggests that they
may have been developed all at once as a
conscious effort and were perhaps even
devised by a single
person the Egyptian hieroglyph for ruler
was the shepherd's crook since the King
was considered to be a kind of Shepherd
for his people Egyptian kings would even
symbolize their royalty by holding a
gilded curved crook modeled after those
used by Shepherds and these Kings have
come to be known as
[Music]
pharaohs the word Pharaoh derives from
the Egyptian word per meaning great
house and it has stuck in the popular
imagination as the name used for any
Egyptian ruler partly due to its use in
the Bible but there is actually no
evidence that it was used to refer to
Egypt's rulers until nearly 2,000 years
after nar's
lifetime up until that time throughout
the first 18 dynasties of Egypt's
history its rulers were simply referred
to as Kings or neset and by epithets
such as his majesty still the term
Pharaoh has gained such currency and
popular usage that it's still used to
refer to all the rulers of Egypt across
the
ages the Pharaoh in an ancient Egypt was
considered the living embodiment of the
Falcon god Horus and the son of the sun
god
Rah one later hymn praises the figure of
the
king Pharaoh is the Lord of wisdom whose
mother knows not his name Pharaoh's
glory is in the sky his might is in the
Horizon Pharaoh is the Bull of the sky
who shatters all at will who lives on
the being of every
God perhaps most famously of all the
Egyptians were compelled by their
religious beliefs to embar the bodies of
the Dead ritually cleansing them in
preparation for the
afterlife the Greek Herodotus who
traveled widely in Egypt wrote about the
specialist in bers who would prepare
Bodies In This Way in exchange for a
fee they whenever a corpse is conveyed
to them show to those who brought it
wooden models of corpses made like
reality by painting and demonstrate on
these the best of the ways of embalming
the second which they show is less good
and also less expensive and the third is
the least expensive of all having told
them about this they inquire in which
way they desire the corpse of their
friend to be
prepared with the price negotiation ated
the AMA could begin their work the
grizzly process of which Herodotus also
describes first with the Crooked iron
tool they draw out the brain through the
nostrils extracting it partly thus and
partly by pouring in drugs and after
this with a sharp Stone of Ethiopia they
make a cut along the side and take out
the whole contents of the belly and and
when they have cleared out the cavity
and cleansed it with palm wine they
cleanse it again with spices pounded up
then they fill the belly with pure myrr
and with cassia and other spices and sew
it together again having done so they
keep covered up in Natron for 70 days
and then they wash the corpse and roll
its whole body up in fine linen cut into
bands smearing those beneath with gum
which the Egyptians use generally
instead of
glue mumification was expensive and only
those with wealth could afford it rich
Merchants Royal officials and of course
the Pharaoh
himself one inscription on the walls of
a tomb for the Pharaoh unas gives a
sense of the kinds of prayers and
blessings that might have been spoken
while these rituals took place this one
to the son God Amun ra and the moon God
th son and tho take unas with you that
he may eat of what you eat of that he
may drink of what you drink of
that he may sit where you sit that he
may sail in what you sail
in the booth of unas is platted of reeds
the flood of unas is in the marsh of
offerings his Feast is among you Gods
the water of unas is wine like the sun
unas will circumnavigate the sky like
the sun unus shall Co the
sky
upon coming to the throne of the newly
United Egypt king nare built a new
capital perfectly placed at the balance
of the two lands Where the River met the
Delta this city would become known as
inbu hedge or the city of white wall
but today we know it as
Memphis the Kings who followed nare
would rule from this new capital but
they spent much of their time traveling
between palaces and when they died their
bodies were still taken back to n's home
region of thinis in Upper Egypt to be
mummified and buried in the city's
ancestral burial ground at
abidos that was until the reign of a
king named hotep
sakm he ruled from about
2,900 BC and started what has been
called the second dynasty of Egypt and
he took the decision to start a new
burial ground near Memphis so that
Egypt's pharaohs could be buried close
to their new
capital for the sight of this new burial
ground he chose a place on the Western
Bank of the river the side where the sun
sets at a vast open place called called
Sakara Sakara is situated on a raised
Plateau that the flood waters of the
Nile do not
reach visually it would have been
striking to ancient people as the place
where the Green River Lands End and the
dead sand of the desert abruptly
Begins for this reason it may have been
considered a Crossing Place between
death and life the perfect place for an
acropolis or a city of the
Dead for Kings who wanted their tombs to
be remembered it also had the benefit of
being highly visible from the new
capital of
Memphis over the coming centuries this
site would become full of tombs of kings
and queens and countless Royal
attendants and Nobles who followed them
into the Afterlife
at first these tombs were built in a
form known as a Musta large rectangular
constructions built of mud brick and
promising their inhabitants a rebirth
into the next
life these could be very large but they
were still relatively
unassuming but soon Egyptian pharaohs
would get even more ambitious with their
burial
Arrangements this ambition truly began
with the rule of a pharaoh
named net jerat
josa the reign of josa Begins the period
known as the Old Kingdom which would
last for the next 500 years josa was the
son of a king named K sakm who had
reunited Egypt after a period of turmoil
during which the northern Delta Rose in
Rebellion with order now restored josa
clearly wanted to keep it that way
rather than continuing to travel around
the country as Pharaoh's before him had
done he moved to a permanent Capital at
Memphis where he could keep a better eye
on the rest of Northern
riverlands over his nearly three decades
of rule he set about an ambitious
program of construction rebuilding
temples and throwing up fortresses All
Along The River but it was in the manner
of of his burial that he would truly
leave his
Mark when joso began the construction of
his final resting place it looked a lot
like the Masta tombs of the kings that
had come before but his Royal architect
soon began dreaming of a more ambitious
structure he was a Visionary Chancellor
and engineer who held numerous official
titles in the Kingdom including head of
the royal Shipyard Royal seal Bearer and
overseer of all Stone
Works his name was
imotep otep's name means the one who
comes in peace and he was born in the
27th century BC but beyond that much of
what we know about him has been
distorted by myth and
Legend he was something of a polymath a
priest a Statesman a scribe physician
and architect and even gained Fame as a
magician he also has the distinction of
being perhaps the first non-royal person
to be recorded in any detail by
history as the king's most trusted
architect imotep was put in charge of
the construction of Joseph's tomb but it
would not be a regular mud brick Musta
like his
predecessors in fact imotep was deter
determined to build this tomb out of
stone this Stone would need to be
quarried from the Bedrock nearby roughly
cut into
blocks but as this Stone Masta rose out
of the desert imotep seems to have had
an
idea with this stronger Building
Material the structure could support
more weight and so there was no real
reason to stop
building once the first Masta was built
built he experimented with placing
another smaller one on top of it and
then another on top of that creating a
stepped design like a wedding
cake originally imotep planned to build
this construction for Te high but soon
he became even more
daring by the time it was finished
joso's tomb stood six layers high it was
perhaps the world's first large scale
construction made from Cut Stone and
rising to a height of 62 m it was likely
also the tallest building on
earth finally the stepped pyramid of
josa was complete and when the king died
he was laid to rest in a granite chamber
beneath the great edifice surrounded by
a maze of
tunnels Joseph's pyramid was a
revolutionary step in Egyptian
architecture and and it would stand as a
challenge to all the kings who would
follow him a challenge that they would
find
irresistible the difficulties that
Engineers like imotep faced in building
these pyramids were enormous but their
achievement becomes even more impressive
when you consider that these monuments
also had to be built fast
today Egypt is littered with the remains
of half-built
pyramids these were abandoned halfway
through their construction usually
because the pharaoh who commissioned
them had died
early once a pharaoh was dead it seemed
no one saw any point in continuing to
build his tomb after all there was a new
Pharaoh now and construction on his
pyramid would have to begin right
away for this reason py pyramids usually
had to be completed at the very least
within 30
years only the Kings with the longest
and most stable Reigns would ever live
to see the final Capstone
placed the next Pharaoh after josea was
a man named seet who may have been
Joseph's brother and he would join the
ranks of the
unfinished as soon as he came to the
throne he began the construction of
another stepped pyramid of immense
ambition sure to dwarf his brother's
achievement but only the first layer of
the pyramid was built when sekmet died
just six or S years into his Reign and
the pyramid was
abandoned another king kabar also died
after 6 years before his stepped pyramid
could be
completed to build each pyramid the
Egyptians would require enormous amounts
of laborers as many as 100,000 per
pyramid with about 10,000 laboring at
any one time there's a widespread
misconception that these monuments were
built by armies of slaves but most
historians now believe this not to be
true slavery was an aspect of Egyptian
society as it was across the ancient
world and slaves were mostly taken from
prisoners of war and also from those who
fell into debt or committed serious
crimes but slaves were mostly used as
domestic servants or if they were
unlucky toiled in extraction Industries
like Mining and quarrying these were
considered an underclass and would not
have been trusted with the construction
of such important and sacred
buildings in fact evidence shows that
the pyramid Builders were a mixture of
professional Artisans and laboring
peasants who worked seasonally in
exchange for
rations the the life of an Egyptian
farmer was dictated by the coming and
going of the annual floods and there
were only a few times of year when they
could be meaningfully employed in the
fields for the rest of the time they
would have leased out their services to
construction projects the digging of
canals and other public works and the
construction of
pyramids while they labored for the king
these workers drank beer through three
times a day and ate meat
regularly they toiled in 3mon shifts and
were divided into teams of 20 men the
discovery of their graffiti hidden on
the inward-facing sides of some stone
blocks in the pyramids shows that they
gave themselves playful and boisterous
team names some of which have been
recorded the friends of
kufu the vigorous gang the followers of
the powerful white crown of kufu those
who know the Pharaoh the drunkards of
men
Cory it seems their supervisors fostered
a sense of Team pride and healthy
competition perhaps giving honors and
extra beer rations for those who shifted
the most
blocks doubtless the work was
backbreaking but over the following
Millennium millions of Egyptians would
take this
deal perhaps they also felt a sense of
Pride at the great constructions they
were taking part in which if all went
well they would live to see
completed these laborers were
sufficiently respected that any who died
during the construction were buried in
tombs within the Royal complex their
bodies forever apart of the monolith
they had given their lives to build an
honor that would never have been given
to a
Slave
the vast administrative effort of
building these tombs over the next
centuries required a fundamental
restructuring of Egyptian government in
the past most of the high positions of
state had been dled out to the pharaoh's
family but with such ambitious projects
to be completed skilled people would be
needed in the decades that followed
individual functions of government such
as the master of scribes and controller
of work shops were separated out and
these roles were delegated to capable
individuals who were promoted on
Merit the egyptologist Toby Wilkinson
summarizes the transformation in the
following
terms as Egypt embarked on Pyramid
building the pyramids were building
Egypt this new cast of civil servants
took pride in their work one Egyptian
text of the fifth Dynasty Records the
advice that a vizer named tar hotap gave
to his son about how to be a successful
administrator let not your heart be
puffed up because of your knowledge be
not confident because you are a wise man
take counsel with the ignorant as well
as the wise good speech is more hidden
than the emerald but it may be found
even among maid servants at the
grindstone still the failures of the
kings that followed joser must have left
a mark on the Empire's morale their
crumbling half finished pyramids stood
in the desert as an image of kingship
that could also be fragile and
fleeting with his stepped pyramid josa
had laid down a provocation that would
have to be answered but it wasn't until
the reign of a king named snu that
someone would rise to the
[Music]
challenge snr's full name was horb maatu
waj Horus Lord of matat has perfected me
mat in Egyptian religious belief was the
embodiment of justice and Truth
sometimes portrayed as a goddess wearing
an ostrich feather on her head who kept
the stars and the seasons in their
regular patterns and maintained
peace opposed to her in their theology
was the concept of isfet chaos darkness
and
disorder this was sometimes depicted Ed
as a Great coiling
Serpent for the most part snr's name
seems to have been appropriate under the
protection of Maat he reigned for as
long as 48 years a time of prosperity
and stability his accession to the
throne is Remembered in the later
Egyptian Source the Prisa
Papyrus the Majesty of the king of Upper
and Lower Egypt honei came to the
landing place of death and the Majesty
of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt
snefru was raised up as a beneficent
King in this entire
land during his half century on the
throne snu would secure his place as
Egypt's most Ardent and determined
pyramid
Builder with the failure of The Last
Kings to build a stepped pyramid to
match joseas snfu began to to wonder if
he could build something even better a
pyramid that conformed to a perfect
geometrical shape he had a vision of a
pyramid with polished smooth sides
unlike anything the world had seen
before his first attempt to accomplish
this would be at the Pyramid of May
Doom
there is some debate about whether the
maom pyramid was built by snefru or by
his predecessor honi but we can assume
they wouldn't compete for the honor as
it stands as one of the most impressive
failed pyramids in
history the maom pyramid was built in
several
stages first it was a step pyramid of
similar design to josea and then this
interior structure was encased in a
steep shell of white Limestone creating
a high and narrow point the effect would
have been beautiful that is until one
day as the pyramid neared completion
when the entire weight of the stone
facing began to collapse in all
directions we can only imagine the noise
and Calamity that must have accompanied
this the workers leaping clear of the
wreckage the overseers watching a gast
as an avalanche of painstakingly cut
stone poured off the side of the pyramid
the moment this happened snu ordered the
construction to be halted workmen inside
the interior Chambers simply put down
their tools and
left today the burial chamber inside the
pyramid is still unfinished with raw
uncarved walls and wooden supports still
in place which were usually removed
after
Construction snu must have been
devastated but he wasn't
discouraged soon he tried again with a
pyramid at the site of
dashur just to the south of the royal
necropolis of
Sakara this pyramid was intended to be
tall and its sides were even steeper
than the first his workmen began to
construct it with a sharp 53 slope to
its sides and this time snu must have
hoped that he would get the pyramid he
dreamed of but this would not turn out
to be the case this second pyramid was
built on ground that was only soft sand
and
Shale as the pyramid took shape and its
weight climbed into the millions of tons
they found that the stone was sinking
into the Earth and causing cracks to
appear in the
structure we can only imagine how it
felt to be the architect who had to
bring this bad news to the king the son
of Rah the living embodiment of the god
Horus the workmen tried everything they
could from adding new supporting blocks
to the base to propping up subsiding
sections with huge beams of cedar wood
but it was hopeless it became clear that
if they continued the pyramid as planned
it would likely collapse just as the
first one
had the Pharaoh snu seems to have
listened to reason he consented to allow
his workmen to hurriedly finish the
pyramid with a reduced angle of only
43° and a final height reduced by 25
M this means that today the pyramid has
a peculiar snub-nosed appearance that is
given it the name the bent pyramid it's
clear that snfu still wasn't
satisfied he now ordered the
construction of a final pyramid 1 km to
the north combining everything his
Craftsmen had learned from the first two
this one was now built with a 43°
incline from the beginning more evenly
Distributing the weight on the earth and
finally snefru got the pyramid he
desired this was the first structure
that truly took the iconic shape of an a
Egyptian pyramid and would be used as a
model for those that would be built in
years to
come it was 105 M High nearly twice the
height of Jose's pyramid and the world's
new tallest
building and its geometrical Perfection
was
undeniable when snefru died he was
buried in this pyramid according to his
wishes and his son took the Throne he
would be the greatest pyramid builder of
all his name was
kufu as a boy kufu must have seen his
father snu obsessed with the
construction of his three
pyramids we can imagine the Young Prince
listening in on his father's
conversations with his architects the
tension and anger as the first two
pyramids failed and then the final
Triumph of The Red Pyramid and perhaps
as a boy he dreamed of one day building
such a monument for
himself we know very little about kufu
or what his Reign was like but it's
clear that he was inspired by one thing
size and above all the desire to build
the largest pyramid that would ever
stand learning from his father's
mistakes on the bent pyramid and likely
inheriting some of his Architects kufu
elected to build his tomb some 15 km to
the northwest of Sakara on a shelf of
strong Limestone just outside Memphis at
a place called
Giza
when construction began on the Great
Pyramid there must have been some
uncertainty about whether it would even
be possible it was built using an
estimated 2.3 million large stone blocks
weighing a total of 6 million tons and
when its first layer was completed it
was the size of more than 10 football
pitches its Builders used predominantly
local Limestone quarried from nearby on
the Giza Plateau to build the pyramid's
interior structure and these were bound
together with lime mortar packed with
straw and
charcoal luckily these organic remains
in the pyramid mortar can be carbon
dated allowing archaeologists to date
the pyramids with scientific certainty
to this
period but while rough Stone would due
for the main body the king's burial
chamber at its heart was made of blocks
of hard granite brought from Aswan since
it needed to resist the crushing weight
of millions of tons of stone above it
the fine Limestone blocks of its outer
shell were quarried at a place called
Tura on the other side of the river the
Stone from these quaries was of
exceptional quality a pale white in
color almost like
marble for this reason it was highly
prized for use on the Interiors of tombs
and the perfect casing for a
pyramid this Limestone was cut out of
underground tunnels in these quaries and
dragged down to the banks of the Nile
where it was loaded onto barges to be
carried
Downstream in order to ease the
transportation of these Stones the
Egyptians dug a series of canals and
artificial Harbors that came right up to
the base of the pyramids one of which
was known as Shake kufu or the pool of
kufu one Papyrus has been uncovered the
oldest ever found that is the work
Journal of an overseer named
marer in it he records the process of
this perhaps less than exhilarating
task day 25 inspector marer spends the
day hauling stones in Torah South spends
the night at Torah Day 26 inspector
morer casts off from tah loaded with
stone spends the night at the pool of
kufu day 27 sat loaded with stone spends
the night at the
pyramid day 28 casts off from the
pyramid in the morning sails up River to
tah
South day
29 inspector morer spends the day
hauling stones in t South spends the
night at Torah day 30 inspector Mora
spends the day hauling stones in Torah
South spends the night at
Torah remarkably the pyramid was
oriented perfectly to True North with
one of its faces at each point of the
compass suggesting that the Egyptians
must have used measurements of the stars
in order to align it the OWN only method
by which they could have achieved such
accuracy and with the Kingdom's now
exceptional organization it's been
estimated that it took only about 23
years to build with the final Stones
being placed around
BC upon its completion the Great Pyramid
of Giza would stand 147 M high or nearly
40 stories it was the tallest man-made
structure in the world and would remain
so for nearly 4,000
years the building that eventually
surpassed it the wooden Spire of Lincoln
cathedral in England completed in 1311
would stand for little more than two
centuries before it collapsed in a
storm today kufu has cemented his name
into history with the construction of
these monuments but other than his
ambitious pyramid little else is known
about him the only representation of him
ever found is a single statuette carved
from Ivory and ironically for a man so
obsessed with grand scale this statue is
only 7 cm or less than 3 in
[Music]
tall when kufu died around
2525 BC his son jedra would take the
throne but his Reign was short and when
he died another of kufu sons became
Pharaoh his name was
caffra the Pharaoh caffra would follow
in his father's and grandfather's
footsteps and build a grand pyramid of
his own he would place it right beside
his father's but for some reason he
declined to build it any
higher it could be that his Builders
perhaps tiring of this Mania for ever
bigger and better pyramids simply told
him that it wouldn't be possible to
build any bigger it may be that caffra
worried that it would have appeared
unseemly to one up his dead father quite
so
ostentatiously perhaps for this reason
caprr's pyramid would be a differential
3 and A2 M shorter than his father's
although he was sure to place it on a
slightly higher shelf of light Limestone
meaning that from many angles it appears
taller coupled with slightly steeper
angled sides this meant caffra was also
able to build his pyramid with perhaps
350,000 fewer stone blocks a saving that
his teams of laborers and stonemasons no
doubt
appreciated today the Pyramid of cfre is
the only pyramid at Giza to retain any
of its original casing stones of smooth
white tah Limestone which still cling to
the top third of the structure perhaps
since its steeper sides made it more
difficult for stone thieves to extract
the very top of its
masonry this allows us to picture how
these monuments would have looked in
their Golden Age the smooth white sides
that must have gleamed blindingly in the
desert sun and at night Sha in the light
of the
Moon these pyramids were also likely
capped with a stone known as a
pyramidion usually carved of diorite or
granite and carved with
hieroglyphs some examples of these
pyramidion have been found with
distinctive grooves that suggest that
they were encased in a decorative metal
either copper or shining electrum an
alloy of gold and and
silver since the pyramidion for the Giza
Pyramids have never been found it's
unknown whether their tops were incased
in metal but if they were it would have
made them an even more impressive sight
a gleaming Pinnacle reaching up to the
heavens within only 100 years or so of
the construction of Joseph's first
steeped pyramid all of Egypt's largest
pyramids had already been built all by
only only three generations of the same
family but almost from the moment the
final Capstone was placed on cfr's
massive Monument enthusiasm for enormous
pyramids began to
Wayne the Pharaoh Mena the son of caffra
and Grandson of kufu also built his
pyramid at Giza around 2510 BC but his
would be significantly
smaller it's not even a tenth the size
of the Great Pyramid and only 2/3 the
size of even Joseph's stepped
pyramid one explanation for this was
that Mena didn't expect to live long
enough to build such a grand
construction as his
predecessors Herodotus records one piece
of tradition about the Pharaoh Mena
which recounts how an oracle told him
that his Reign would be short as a
result he determined to make the best of
the time he had and perhaps this left
him little time for Pyramid
building the king deemed this unjust and
sent back to the Oracle a message of
reproach blaming the God why must he die
so soon whereas his father and his uncle
had lived long he caused many lamps to
be made and would light these at
nightfall and drink and make Merry by
day day or night he never ceased from
ring roaming to the marsh country and
the Groves and whenever he heard of the
likeliest places of
pleasure whether there's any truth to
this or not it's clear Mena had
different priorities to kufu and cfre
and his more modest pyramid seems to
have broken the spell of his family's
one
upmanship for the next Thousand Years
arrows would continue to build pyramid
tombs but they would be mostly at a much
reduced scale and they would cut bigger
and bigger Corners in their
construction instead of a solid
Limestone structure these later
monuments would often be a simple
Limestone shell encasing a core of mud
brick or simply Earth and sand for this
reason little remains of these later
pyramids other than Melancholy heaps
alone in in the
desert slowly the practice would begin
to die out all
together the reason Egyptians stopped
building pyramids was partly due to
changes in religious attitudes towards
burial but it also seems to have stemmed
from concern over tomb
robbers after all a pyramid was
essentially an enormous sign announcing
to the world that the richest man in
Egypt was buried there from the earliest
days
people were drawn to the tombs of long
dead Kings to attempt to steal their
Treasures one tomb inscription of a
royal architect named ineni gives us a
clue about these changing
priorities he writes that he constructed
his king's tomb not in an ostentatious
Declaration of power but in total
secrecy a supervised the excavation of
the cliff tomb of his mag Majesty alone
no one seeing no one
hearing even with these secret tombs
grave robbers were still a constant
concern one pharaoh of the later New
Kingdom would order an inspection of his
predecessors tombs and his inspectors
brought back troubling
news the Tomb of the king it was found
that the evildoers have damaged it by
forcing an opening into the main chamber
of his tomb through the passage wall of
the sanctuary of neberman superintendent
of the Grain Stores of the king in the
ferary place the body of the king had
been removed and the tomb of his Royal
spouse the Royal Lady of numbas was
empty the robbers had laid violent hands
on
them it wasn't just the precious
treasures inside that were
stolen as the overseer marer had found
cutting the limestone stone blocks from
the quaries of Tora was one of the most
timec consuming parts of construction
for this reason pharaohs who felt more
pressed for time sometimes despoiled
previous pyramids of their cut stone in
order to speed along their own
monuments one Middle Kingdom text known
as the instruction of maricare advises
Kings against this shameful
practice do not despoil the Monument of
another but quarry stone
nura do not build your tomb out of ruins
using what has been made for what is to
be
made in place of constructing their own
pyramids at Sakara or Giza the later
pharaohs would be buried at a place near
thieves that the Egyptians called The
Great and Majestic necropolis of the
millions of years of the Pharaoh or
sometimes the great field but today it
is known as the Valley of the
Kings here a natural rock formation
known as elur or the horn rises above a
series of dramatic Red
Cliffs when viewed from the entrance to
the tombs here this pointed peak
somewhat resembles a natural
pyramid it's possible that this
convenient land form may have relieved
some of the pressure on each Egypt's
pharaohs and allowed them an equally
prestigious place to be buried while
freeing up an Untold amount of energy
and Manpower in the
Kingdom Egypt's manual laborers could
perhaps breathe a sigh of relief slowly
the age of the pyramids came to an
end still that was a long time in the
future and throughout the fourth and
fifth dynasties of Egypt Royal Monument
construction continued
confidently but in the sixth Dynasty
around the 23rd Century BC construction
began to
decline part of the reason for this was
an increasing decentralization of the
Empire and a gradual weakening of the
power of the
king the final pharaoh of the Old
Kingdom was named Pepe
II he came to the throne at the age of
six and ruled for more than 60 years
Pepe was an excitable and enthusiastic
child as we can see from one tomb
inscription by one of his officials
named
Huf Huf had a long and illustrious
career he served as the mayor of one of
egyp eypt Southern provinces in the
region of the Nile cataract of Aswan the
narrow gate to the
South the highlight of his life was the
four journeys of exploration he
undertook on behalf of his Pharaoh
following the Nile down into the heart
of central Africa into what the
Egyptians called The Horizon lands he
wrote a full account of one of these
Expeditions on the walls of his
tomb I accomplished it in 7 months I
brought back from there all sorts of
beautiful exotic produce and was praised
for it very greatly I came back with 300
donkeys Laden with incense ebony
precious oil grain leopard skins and
elephant
tusks the boy Pharaoh peepe was so
delighted with hu's trip that he wrote a
letter directly to him the letter was
likely written on fragile Papyrus and
has not survived but luckily hu was so
proud of this sign of Royal favor that
he had the letter copied out word for
word on the wall of his tomb his
proudest moment etched into stone for
eternity in it we get a sense for the
voice of this excitable young
king you know how to do what your lord
loves and favors you wake and you sleep
planning to do what your lord loves
favors and commands unique friend
Haku Pepe was especially excited by a
small man that Haku had come across in
East Africa and had brought back with
him perhaps either a man with dwarfism
or a member of the so-called pygmy
tribes of central
Africa you have further said in this
message that you have brought a dwarf of
the God's dances from the land of the
Horizon dwellers come Downstream to the
Residence at once hurry and bring with
you this dwarf that you have brought
alive prosperous and healthy for the
King when he goes down with you into the
boat have excellent people around him on
Deck lest he fall in the water my
Majesty wishes to see this particular
dwarf more than the produce of the
lands however as a pharaoh Pepe was
relatively
ineffectual during his childhood his
mother and Grand viers seem to have done
much of the ruling and as an adult he
continued a relatively hands-off
approach to the
kingdom for much of its history Egypt
had been governed by Regional
administrators known as nomarchs who
were appointed by the pharaoh to rule
over their regions on his
behalf Pepe's long Reign saw an
increasing am amount of power passing to
these Regional
Governors gradually their positions
became hereditary rather than appointed
so that single families began to amass
large amounts of power and their tombs
became larger and more elaborate with
every passing
year these nomarchs were soon beginning
to look a lot like feudal Lords or even
Petty Kings and even began fighting
amongst themselves meanwhile the once
boy King Pepe was now entering his 70s
frail and increasingly detached from the
business of
ruling this might not have been a death
blow for the kingdom but it was around
this time that a record drought
descended over Egypt and the entire
Eastern Mediterranean starting around
the year 20200
BC this climate shift we have
encountered before
it is known as the 4.2 kiloyear event
and has been implicated in the collapse
of the AC cardian Empire in Mesopotamia
and perhaps even the Indus Valley
Civilization in India and
Pakistan in Egypt the result of this
event was a series of years in which the
Nile floods were much reduced and
agriculture came under immense pressure
the drought was so severe and long
lasting that The Verdant lake at fum
that once stood 65 M deep completely
dried up over the next 50 years and crop
yields would have
plummeted the long reign of a pharaoh
was usually good news for the
kingdom it tended to generate a period
of stability and often Prosperity but
when a king's rule went on too long it
had the tendency to create what we might
call The Old King problem the long reign
of the Pharaoh Pepe along with his
multiple wives meant that he had
countless children many of them now old
men themselves with children and
grandchildren of their own and they were
all impatient to see this Old King pass
on so that they would get their chance
to rule when Pepe finally died around
217 5 BC What followed was a succession
crisis of immense
proportions the chaos Serpent of isfet
now wound its way around all the lands
of
Egypt in the two decades that followed
the kingdom would see no fewer than 17
pharaohs come and go some perhaps dying
of old age and others no doubt killed by
their
Rivals the only one of these Kings to
survive more than a year on the throne
was a man named iby who even somewhat
optimistically tried his hand at
building a pyramid at the Royal burial
ground of sakada but this Monument was a
testament to the now much reduced state
of the empire
standing at little more than 30 m high
it was smaller than the pyramids of some
of the earlier King's wives on top of
that it was lazily constructed around a
core of mud and Limestone
chips King iby the man who was to be
buried under this sad Monument ruled for
only 2 years one month and a day and
likely did not control all of Egypt now
local Nar Governors declared
independence and ruled their provinces
alone their tombs around this time stop
referring to the reign of a pharaoh and
are full of boasts and elaborate titles
that they seem to have invented for
themselves one tomb inscription for a
powerful Nomar named atifi demonstrates
how the centralized power of the King
was
declining
I am the Vanguard of the men the rear
guard of the men a leader of the land
through active conduct strong in speech
collected in thought for I am without
Peer who spoke out when people were
silent on the day of fear when Upper
Egypt was
silent antii recalls the time of famine
that swept over the land as crisis after
crisis rocked the struggling old Old
Kingdom all of Upper Egypt was dying of
hunger to such a degree that everyone
had come to eating his children but I
managed that no one died of hunger in
this province the entire country had
become like a starved grasshopper with
people going to the north and to the
south in search of
grain Egypt was now fracturing into
something like the shape it had been
before King nare had fused it into a
stable centralized State nearly 800
years
before refugees were flooding the
roads another later Egyptian writer
called uer who lived in the period
following this chaos describes people
resorting to theft to survive and
violence
spreading the Guardians of the house say
let us go and steal the snares of birds
of formed themselves into armed bands
The Peasants of the Delta have provided
themselves with shields a man regards
his son as his enemy the wrongdoer is in
every place the inundation of the Nile
comes yet no one goes out to
plow uer describes a widespread economic
collapse during which trade from foreign
lands dried
up the skilled Masons who built pyramids
now labor on farms and those who tended
the boat of the gods are yolked together
in plowing men do not go on voyages
today what shall we do for Cedarwood for
our mummies in coffins of which priests
are buried and with the oil of which men
are
embed they come no
longer everything is in
Ruins laughter is dead if I only knew
where God was I would make offerings to
him throughout this period of about 200
years some at least must have dreamed of
a better time awaiting them in the
future another text written after this
time known as the prophecy of neferti
contains a prediction that a ruler would
come who would end this time of
strife a king will come he will take the
White Crown he will wear the Red Crown
he will unite the two Mighty lands
Rejoice ye people of his time the
asiatics will fall to his sword and the
libyans will fall to his flame the
rebels belong to his wroth and the
treacherous in heart belong to the AE of
him the man who would fulfill this
prophecy or rather the man in whose
Reign the prophecy was more likely
written would reunite Egypt and Usher in
a new age of
stability his name was nebbe petre menu
hotap
II menu hotap was a king in in the city
of Thieves in Upper
Egypt sitting on the Eastern Bank of the
Nile about 800 km from the Mediterranean
thieves is one of the sunniest and
driest cities in the world it had been
the capital of its own Province
throughout the Old Kingdom but had
always been something of a Backwater and
somewhat influenced by the African
culture of
Nubia but during The More Than A Century
of of chaos that surrounded the collapse
of the Old Kingdom thieves slowly grew
to become the capital of the South and
its Kings began referring to themselves
as the great Overlord of Upper
Egypt it was a city where tightly packed
rows of houses granaries and workshops
clustered around the central Temple to
the god
Amon and its people clearly sought a
break from the suffocating influence of
the king in
Memphis but in the North near the
traditional Center of Egyptian power an
ambitious and ruthless rival was also
amassing its
forces this was centered around the city
of henen nut in Lower Egypt in The
Verdant region between the River Nile
and the great lake at fum a region that
the desert thebans dismissively called
the marsh
lands this city City would later be
known as heracleopolis or the city of
Hercules for about a 100 years during
this time of dissolution thieves and
henen nut had fought bitter Wars over
small border regions Forts and roads but
neither side could ever gain the upper
hand that was until the reign of the
King of Thieves menu
hotap he was named after the thean god
of war and came from a lion of warlike
Kings he clearly desired to bring this
series of conflicts to a decisive
conclusion and reunite the fractured
Kingdom of
old the final confrontation between
North and South would be sparked by a
rebellion in the city of thinis once
home to King namare and which was now
one of the vassals of
Thieves delighted by this development
the northern power of hanen nut seized
the opportunity and marched South into
the desert to capture the
town War soon raged across all
Egypt at one point the Northerners
pushed South and captured the ancient
Sacred City of abidos and there
Unleashed a wave of Destruction against
its temples and
palaces
one later text known as the instruction
to maricard purports to be written by a
king of Northern henen nut who is racked
with guilt for the destruction of this
Sacred
City Lo a shameful deed occurred in my
time the province of th was ravaged
though it happened through my doing I
learned it after it was done there was
richet contribution for what I had done
for it is evil to
destroy beware of it a blow is repaid by
its like to every action there is a
response this response would come in the
form of a thundering reprisal by the
King of Thieves men to
hotap he would March into the North and
defeat the armies of henen
nut next he rounded on the Northern
Capital when he captured it all of the
ferary monuments of its Kings were
defaced and destroyed perhaps suggesting
a sacking of the city whatever the
Northerners had done to the sacred
center of abidos it was clearly visited
upon them and their City
tfold menu hotep now swept through
Northern Egypt and the provincial
Governors saw the writing on the wall
and swore fty to him after nearly two
centuries of dissolution the two halves
of Egypt were once again
[Music]
United the period that followed known as
the middle King Kingdom of Egypt would
last for around 300 years but it has not
left an impressive archaeological
record compared to the Towering pyramids
of the Old Kingdom and the architectural
magnificence of the later new kingdom it
stands out as something of a dull time
for Grand Monument
construction but it did experience a
flourishing in another area that is in
the realm of Egyptian literature
one famous story written around this
time is called the tale of
sinu it narrates the life of a man who
traveled North into Palestine and Beyond
but who eventually becomes homesick and
decides to return to
Egypt another collection of stories was
written around this time a kind of
ancient Arabian Knights known as the
Tales of
Wonder it relates a number of
fantastical stories imagining that they
were told to the great Pharaoh kufu of
the Old Kingdom by his three
sons another story written during the
Middle Kingdom is known as the tale of
the Shipwrecked sailor a kind of ancient
guliver travels it is remarkable for its
innovative structure a tale within a
tale about a sailor Shipwrecked in the
Mediterranean who finds himself on an
island ruled by a gigantic serpent
a storm came up with us on the Open Sea
and no chance for us to reach
Harbor the wind grew sharp and made a
constant moaning and there were hungry
14 foot high
waves a piece of wood of some sort hit
me and then the ship was
dead of all those fine men not a one
survived then I was carried to a desert
island by a swell of the great green
sea the man speaks with the Great
Serpent who tells him a sad story of his
own that his whole family was killed
when a star fell to Earth the serpent
tells the man not to fear that a ship
will eventually pass by the island and
rescue him and reassures him that he
will soon have a great story to
tell now you are going to spend one
month and then another until you finish
four months on this island then a ship
will come from Egypt with Sailors in it
whom you know that you may go with them
toward home and die in your own
City what joy for one who lives to tell
the things he has been through when the
suffering is
over finally the predicted ship arrives
and the man is
rescued
at last the ship arrived just as he had
foretold I climbed a lofty tree and
recognized the sailors in the ship and
went running to report it then I
descended to the shore near where the
ship was I hailed the crew and offered
thanks beside the sea to the lord of the
aisle and those on board did likewise
we have examples of myths and legends
written before this time and religious
texts but this is not the story of some
bygone king or the actions of the Gods
it's a story about an ordinary man in a
Fantastical situation told seemingly
just for the entertainment value of
telling a story and for that reason it
is possibly the first true piece of
literature it was likely written around
the year 1900 BC and is therefore nearly
4,000 years
[Music]
old the lives of Egypt's phos take up so
much of the usual discussion of its
history partly because they are the ones
commissioned the inscriptions The
Monuments and the statues but as the
Middle Kingdom's flourishing of
literature continued we get more and
more of a sense of what life was like
for ordinary people in the Nile
Valley one text of this period known as
the Papyrus Lancing gives a fascinating
insight into the lives of Egypt's Common
People it is written as a piece of
rhetoric by a master scribe to one of
his pupils attempting to convince him to
become a scribe in
turn and from this we get a wonderful
impression of all the ways that people
could make their living in the land of
Egypt young fellow writing to him who
knows it is more profitable than any
profession it is pleasanter than bread
and beer than clothing than oil yes it
is more precious than an inheritance in
Egypt than a tomb in the west look for
thyself with your own eye here all the
professions are set before you the
washerman spends the whole day going up
and down every limb of his is a weary
whitening the clothes of his neighbors
every
day the Potter is smeared with mud like
a man in mourning his hands and feet are
full of clay he is like one who lives in
the
Bog the cobbler mixes tanning lotions
his odor is marked his hands are red
with dye like one who is smeared with
his
blood the florist makes bouquets and
makes the wine jar stands beautiful he
spends a night of toil sweating like one
on Whose body the sun is
shining the merchants farare Downstream
and upstream and are as busy as can be
carrying wees from one town to another
and supplying him that hath
not if thou Hast any
sense be a
scribe whether or not daily life was
truly that bad for all these other
workers we can't tell because of course
none of them wrote down down how they
felt most of Egypt's people were peasant
farmers and even when they practiced
these other professions they likely
engaged in some farming
too these peasants did not own the land
they worked and were required to give
most of the food they produced to the
crown or to their local
temple to supplement their diets most
houses kept private kitchen Gardens too
which the women would tend while the men
went out to the
fields Egyptian women were also
responsible for baking the bread they
ate every
day bread in Egypt was made primarily
with Emma wheat dough was often pressed
into clay molds and baked and at times
people got creative baking bread in
spirals like a cinnamon swirl and using
shaped molds to bake loaves in the form
of
animals those who could afford it also
baked Cakes and Pastries out of the
finest flour sweetened with dates and
honey alongside their bread Egyptians
ate a varied diet including garlic and
spring onions lettuce celery cucumbers
gourds and melons
they supplemented these with high
protein beans and pulses like lentils
and chickpeas and a kind of edible tuba
known as a tiger nut that grows at the
base of wetland
sedges all of this was cooked in olive
oil at least from the time the pyramids
were
built at times they would also eat meat
primarily beef lamb pork and goat as
well as Quail pigeon duck geese and
Partridge mice were even eaten at times
and even hedgehogs the Egyptians cooked
these spiky creatures by wrapping them
in wet clay and baking them in it and
when the clay was cracked open
afterwards it took the Hedgehog's spines
with it the Egyptians also made cheese
and even fua gr made from Force feeding
geese
one text written by a scribe to the
queen nefer tari urges people to share
with others the food they
have do not eat bread while another
stands by without extending your hand to
him as to food it is here always it is
man who does not last one man is rich
another is poor but food remains for him
who shares
it be beer was exceptionally popular in
Egypt and people consumed it daily as a
result breweries were important centers
of
Industry beer was thought to have been
given to Egypt by the goddess hathor the
goddess of beauty music and dancing and
breweries were watched over by the
goddess tenonet so fittingly many beer
factories were run by women some of
these were enormous and were capable of
bre in more than a million liters a year
they used large pottery Vats propped up
on mud bricks over crackling fires and
inside these they heated barley and
water then left the mixture to ferment
before flavoring The Brew with honey and
syrups made of dates and other
fruit there was even one Annual Festival
called the tech Festival that would
become known as the Festival of
drunkenness
during this Fiesta Egyptians would drink
as much beer as they could and then fall
asleep together in a large Hall they
would then be awoken all together by the
loud beating of drums it was said that
in the moment just after waking some of
them would meet the goddess hathor
herself
Egypt was one of the most stable and
prosperous agricultural Societies in the
ancient world but it was a society built
entirely on the collection and storage
of grain as a result there was one
everpresent danger that was the presence
of mice and
rats grain was stored in large circular
granaries within the towns shaped like
beehives and freshly harvested wheat or
barley was poured in through a hole in
the top to be preserved in the hot dry
air when grain was needed for bread
making or beer brewing it was taken from
a small door in the bottom of these
granaries but if mice got into this
storage or even ate the grain while it
was still in the fields then thousands
of hours of work could be wasted and
people might even
starve but thankfully Egyptians were
able to rely on one particular set of
allies that was the domestic
cat there were two major breeds of wild
cat native to Egypt the jungle cat or
felis chaus and the African wild cat
felis sylvestris
Lia of these the African wild cat had
something of a Karma temperament and so
was most commonly bred as a pet with
evidence of their domestication in Egypt
from at least 5,000 years
ago these cats were kept around Egyptian
settlements for their obvious utility
both in controlling mice and with their
almost Supernatural reflexes for their
ability to kill venomous
snakes but it's clear that the Egyptians
also enjoyed their company and even
loved
them some particularly beloved pets were
buried with tiny offerings intended to
serve them well in the cat
afterlife the Greek writer doodas of
Sicily recall seeing Egyptians
performing burial ceremonies for their
cats when one of these animals dies they
wrap it in fine linen and then wailing
and beating eating their breasts carry
it off to be embed and after it has been
treated with cedar oil and such spices
have the quality of imparting a pleasant
odor and of preserving the body for a
long time they lay it away in a
consecrated
tomb while the earliest domestication of
the house cat took place elsewhere in
the Fertile Crescent it was in Egypt
that it accelerated
dramatically as cats got used to their
new survival Niche they in turn began to
adapt they largely lost their original
camouflage Coatings became smaller and
even developed new ways of signaling to
their human patrons with soft insistent
cries modulated to similar frequencies
as a human
baby fittingly the Egyptian word for cat
was
Mew
over time this Adoration of their feline
companions seems to have become a
religious reverence
too with their ease and Grace cats in
Egypt were associated with femininity
and paintings in tombs often show the
household dog sitting below a man's
chair while a cat sits under the woman's
chair one goddess named bastet would
soon become revered and she manifested
as a woman with the head of a house
cat bastet became a god of fertility and
women would appeal to her during times
of childbirth and
pregnancy diodorus later records seeing
an Egyption Festival during which cats
were ritually
fed for the cats they break up bread
into milk and calling them with a
clucking sound set it before them or
else they cut up fish caught in the
knife
and feed the flesh to them Roar all who
meet these animals fall down before them
and render them with
honor the Egyptians were also fiercely
protective of their feline companions as
diodorus
recounts whoever kills a cat whether
intentionally or
unintentionally he is certainly put to
death for common people Gathering crowds
and deal with the perpetrator most
cruy sometimes doing this without
waiting for a
trial the worship and veneration of cats
would continue throughout all the
thousands of years of ancient Egyptian
history and for the cats it is perhaps
something that they have never quite
forgotten the Middle Kingdom was not
just a time of entertainment and
pleasure
with the Mania for Pyramid building
somewhat subsided certain pharaohs
engaged in large-scale construction
projects to strengthen and develop the
Empire one king spent much of his life
on a vast irrigation project around the
Oasis at fum determined to turn it into
a productive sthe of Farmland another
built a large series of defensive walls
in the Nile Delta hemming Egypt off from
the people of the wider Middle East
whom the Egyptians called
asiatics these people were often
depicted in their paintings with lighter
more yellowish skin than the Egyptians
and were held in general contempt as
uncivilized
barbarians the Egyptians soon began
pushing their sphere of influence into
this area expanding their territory
North along the Mediterranean coast and
into Palestine they crossed the Sinai
desert and subjugated The Phoenician
city of biblos then they turned their
attention South to Eastern Africa what
the Egyptians called The Horizon lands
the lands of the
Nubians like the light-skinned asiatics
in the north the Egyptians considered
the southern Nubians different to them
and usually depicted them with darker
skin than Egyptians and more typically
African features at this time these
kingdoms were relatively underdeveloped
and were easy prey for an aggressive and
expansionist
[Music]
Egypt we've already seen that the first
cataract of the Nile was at Aswan where
the granite Bedrock forced the water
into a series of rushing whitewater
rapids if an ancient Egyptian traveled
up River Beyond Aswan and into the
Horizon lands they would encounter five
more major cataracts of the
Nile these are each places where the
river becomes shallow and travel by boat
becomes difficult and so they were
natural stops along any Journey up River
they were also the obvious place to draw
borders during the Middle Kingdom Egypt
marched into the Horizon lands multiple
times and pushed its Southern border as
far as the second
cataract around the 1860s BC One Middle
Kingdom King named senos III marched
even further south into the Nubian
kingdoms of kush and punt he remembers
this brutal campaign in one
inscription the Nubians are wretches
Craven hearted my Majesty has seen it it
is not an untruth I have captured their
women I have carried off their subjects
poisoned their Wells killed their cattle
cut down their grain set fire to
it in this remorseless fashion senusret
marched beyond the second Cataract and
built a powerful set of
fortresses we get a sense for their
purpose from the names the Egyptians
gave to them one of them at Ascot was
named crushing the Nubians while another
at shalak was named subduing the foreign
lands in another imposing Fortress at
semna now more than 400 km Upstream from
the former border of Aswan senusret left
a stone monument with the following
triumphant
inscription year 16 third month of
Winter the king made his southern
boundary I have made my boundary further
south than my fathers I have added to
what was bequeathed me as for any son of
mine who shall maintain this border
which my Majesty has made he is my son
but he who abandons it who fails to
fight for it he is not my son he was not
born to
me
these forts were manned by powerful
units of Egyptian soldiers tasked with
keeping order among the newly colonized
Nubians to this end they engaged in a
paranoid surveillance regime of the
local people to the Pharaoh senos rat
they sent back constant updates on
Papyrus Scrolls about the movements of
even the most minute groups of Nubians
some some of which have
survived the patrol who went forth to
patrol the Desert Edge from The Fortress
kive maou in year three month three of
the growing season last day have come to
report to me saying we have found the
tracks of 32 men and three
donkeys all these dispatches end in the
same way with the same comforting offer
of reassurance to the
king all the Affairs of the king's
domain are safe and sound all the
Affairs of the master are safe and
sound but we have reason to believe that
King senat was not entirely
reassured he is famous for the numerous
sculptures he had made of himself
statues carved from black diorite that
depict him in strangely realistic
fashion unlike any depictions of a
pharaoh that had come before in these
statues his ears are extended to
enormous proportions like a bat perhaps
projecting the image of a king who heard
every movement in his kingdom relayed by
his extensive system of
spies three of these statues in
particular show the king first as a boy
then as a man and finally in old
age in this final statue we get a sense
for the mental toll it took on a man to
sit at the top of this paranoid system
the pharaoh's weary sunken eyes his
Haggard face contorted in an expression
of Eternal
worry today these three statues stand as
a kind of metaphor for the state the
Egyptian Middle Kingdom had sunk into
during its final
decades Sen's son Amat II did just as
his father's inscriptions had urged and
held the southern border against the the
Nubians but following his Reign Egypt
was once more plunged into a succession
crisis the crisis was so severe that
their next king was something that had
until then been almost Unthinkable a
woman her name was SOC nephu possibly
the daughter sister or wife of the
previous Pharaoh she was probably not
the first woman to hold power in Egypt
but she was the first one to attain the
full official title of a king SOC nephu
used masculine titles in her
inscriptions and one Statue of her even
shows her wearing an unconventional
mixture of male and female
clothing however she did not succeed in
slowing the Dynasty's
decline she died after ruling for only
four years and did not leave any
heirs after that the serpent isfet
uncoiled once more and Egypt slid into
chaos during the time that followed
known as the second intermediate period
there were 150 years during which at
least 50 Kings
ruled Egypt once again split in two and
local Governors stopped mentioning the
king in their tomb
inscriptions the pyramids of this period
have had already become small and meager
mostly built from mud brick but now
their construction stopped all
together some Kings were even buried in
simple shaft tombs little better than
commoners much of the Nile Delta of
Lower Egypt had already broken away from
the Empire and now in the South the
people of Nubia were in open
Rebellion one by one the Egyptians were
forced to let go of their southern forts
abandoning them to the
Nubians once a symbol of the Empire's
confidence these powerful fortresses now
became unprecedented military assets for
their enemies and bases from which
powerful raiding parties ranged ever
farther into Egypt the cruelty that the
Egyptians had shown to their Nubian
neighbors was now being paid back in
full with the northern and southern
borders convulsed in Conflict Egypt's
trade links with the rest of the world
were severely
disrupted it was also during this time
or perhaps later that the entire
Mediterranean in fact most of the world
witnessed one of the largest natural
disasters in human
history that is the eruption of the
volcano Thea now known as the Greek
island of Santorini only 700 km from the
Egyptian Coast
it's likely that the Egyptians would
have heard the Deep boom of this
explosion which went off with the force
of several hundred atomic
bombs when the Indonesian volcano katoa
erupted in 1883 the explosion Was Heard
more than 3,000 km away and it's thought
that the Thea explosion was was at least
four times more
powerful today the seawater filled
volcanic crater left by the eruption is
more than 10 km
wide this event may have ejected more
than 40 square km of rock into the
atmosphere the black plume would have
been Riven with volcanic lightning and
it would have triggered tsunamis 10 m
high that would have devastated coastal
regions as well as causing a volcanic
winter the eruption may have wiped out
the Manan civilization on cre in one
blow perhaps inspiring part of the
Atlantis myth and Chronicles as far away
as China record a period when the sky
turned a strange yellow color and crop
yields fell one Egyptian inscription
known as The Tempest Stell May record
some memory of this terrifying event
the gods expressed their discontent the
gods made the sky come with a tempest it
caused darkness in the western region
the sky was Unleashed more powerful on
the mountains than the turbulence of the
Cataract at Aswan each house each
shelter that they reached were floating
in the water like the barks of Papyrus
outside the Royal residence for
days Volcan anic Ash or tefra would have
begun to rain down on the whole region
and today can be detected at virtually
every site in the Eastern
Mediterranean spurred by this natural
disaster and exacerbated by the collapse
of the Egyptian Administration soon
famine once more descended on the
land among all of this a powerful and
mysterious force of Outsiders must have
been
watching they came from the Eastern
Mediterranean region from across the
Sinai desert and they intended to
conquer Egypt and Rule it for
themselves these people were known as
the
hixus the word hios comes from the
Egyptian phrase hea cut meaning rulers
of foreign
lands where exactly the hixus were from
is unnown but it's thought they may have
originated in the region of Syria and
one thing seems to have been behind
their great military
success and that was the
Chariot at this point some form of
Chariot had been used by various
societies for many
centuries Vehicles like a kind of War
cart with four solid wooden Wheels
pulled by donkeys are depicted on the
Sumerian standard of ore which was
created around the time that the
Pyramids of Giza were being built but
Egypt had never experimented with this
kind of vehicle and over the preceding
Millennium the technology had taken huge
leaps
forward the Chariots that the hixus
brought into Egypt for the first time
had two wheels with spokes light and
fast and they were each pulled by two
powerful animals that have been recently
introduced to the region the
horse these chariots were strong and
mobile battle platforms that could break
enemy battle lines while onboard archers
with powerful bows could Pelt enemies
with
missiles whether the hixus arrived in
Egypt as a violent Invasion or a more
peaceful migration is somewhat Up For
Debate people from the North had been
settling in the Nile Delta for centuries
and much of the population there was
already what the Egyptians would
consider foreign by the time the hixus
rulers arrived but the hixus were
clearly not
pacifists they set up their own kingdom
in the Nile Delta with its capital at
avaris and in a devastating blow to
Egyptian morale even swept South to
capture the ancient capital of
Memphis one much later Source named Mano
records the arrival of the
hixus by main Force they easily seized
the country without striking a blow and
having overpowered the rulers of the
land they then burned our cities
ruthlessly raised to the ground the
temples of the
Gods finally they appointed us King one
of the number he had his seat at Memphis
levying tribute from Upper and Lower
Egypt and always leaving garison behind
in the most advantageous
positions the pyramids that great symbol
of Egyptian Prestige were now in foreign
hands Egyptian kings would now Retreat
back to their former capital in Upper
Egypt the city of
Thieves with the Nubian inre
increasingly powerful in the South and
now the new threat of these hixus Kings
looming from the north the weakened
Egyptians increasingly felt like they
were being crushed in a
vice for a time it must have seemed like
the age of an independent Egypt was
[Music]
over one king named camosa who came to
the throne of Thieves around 1555 BC
would put this intolerable situation in
the following
terms I should like to know what serves
this strength of mine when a Chieftain
is in avaris and another in Kush and I
sit United with an Asiatic and a Nubian
each in possession of his slice of Egypt
and I cannot pass by him as far as
Memphis no man can settle down when when
despoiled by the taxes of the asiatics I
will grapple with him that I may rip
open his belly my wish is to save Egypt
and to Smite the
Asiatic King camosa may have had a very
personal reason to hate the
hixus the mummified remains of the
previous Pharaoh his father have been
uncovered and modern analysis shows that
he suffered brutal wounds to the head
from a heavy bladed weapon these blows
must have sliced his cheek and fractured
his jaw and skull leading many to
conclude that he died on the
battlefield the king's body was then
rushed back to thieves where it was
hastily
mummified If Prince camosa saw his
father's body in this state as it was
carried back into the city we can only
imagine the kind of hatred that must
have burned in his heart towards the
hixus Invaders in the
north but many in ca's court were
clearly afraid of what a war with the
hixus would do to the fragile state of
the
country one text known as the canavan
tablet describes how they appealed to
their King to maintain the
peace we are tranquil in our part of
Egypt as Swan at the first cataract is
strong and the middle part of the land
is with us men till for us the finest of
their lands they allow our cattle to
pasture in the Papyrus marshes corn is
sent for our swine our cattle are not
taken away he holds the land of the
asiatics we hold Egypt only when one
comes against us should we act against
him but camoo
refused he wanted to strike a blow at
the hixus but he knew that he would have
to secure the southern border first and
recapture the old fortress of buhan just
before the second cataract of the
Nile buhan was one of the strong walled
bastions built by senat III and it was
one of the only forts the Egyptians
built from Stone rather than brick but
since the collapse of the Middle Kingdom
its Garrison had served a Nubian Lord
from the kingdom of
kush if the southern order was to hold
while camosa expelled the hixus in the
north he would need to recapture the
fort of
buhan camosa marched South preparing to
assault the fort but it seems that upon
sighting the enormous Egyptian Army on
the horizon the citizens of the Fortress
got the message and decided to swear
allegiance to the Pharaoh without a
fight with this powerful force Fort now
holding the South camosa marched back to
thieves and prepared for the next
campaign season when he would seek to
bring War to the hixus and unite Egypt
once
more in the third year of his Reign
camosa
struck I sailed North in my might to
repel the asiatics through the command
of Amun with my Brave Army before me
like a flame of fire and The Archers are
top out fighting
decks ca's Fleet descended swiftly on
the hixus in what appears to have been
something of a surprise attack caught
off guard the foreigners were defeated
and the Vengeance of camosa was
terrible when day dawned I was upon him
as if it were a hawk when breakfast time
came I overthrew him having destroyed
his walls and slaughtered his people and
made his wife descend to the river bank
my Army acted like lions with their
spoil chattles cattle fat honey dividing
their things their hearts
joyful as for avarus on the two rivers I
laid it waste without inhabitants I
destroyed their towns and burned their
homes to rened ruin heaps
forever because of the destruction they
had wrought in the midst of Egypt they
who had allowed themselves to hearken to
the call of the asiatics had forsaken
Egypt their
mistress the king of the hixus
immediately appealed to his Nubian Ally
the king of kush for help at one point
the Egyptians intercepted a secret
message traveling south along the desert
roads the contents of which they
recorded have you noticed what Egypt has
done done against me the ruler who is
there camos penetrates my territory even
though I have not attacked him as he has
you he chooses these two lands in order
to afflict them my land and yours and he
has ravaged them come northward do not
flinch then we shall divide up the towns
of
Egypt when this messenger returned to
the battled hixus King shamefaced and
with the letter undelivered he must have
known that all was
lost the war came to a swift end and
camosa recounts with perhaps some
exaggeration his heroic return to
thieves what a happy home trip for the
ruler life Prosperity happiness with his
army ahead of him they had no casualties
nor did anyone blame his fellow nor did
their hearts weep I mored on home soil
during the season of inundation the
riverbank was resplendant thieves was
festive women and men had come to see me
every woman hugged her neighbor no one
was
tearful his son akosa would press this
advantage and in an even more
devastating campaign seized the ancient
capital of
Memphis akm MOA would be the first
pharaoh in at least 100 years to
recapture the Great Pyramids of Giza and
we can imagine his feelings as he gazed
up at the monuments of his ancestors
kufu and cfre by now already more than a
thousand years
old it's clear that the site inspired
him and he would even build a pyramid of
his own in Upper Egypt at the site of
abidos this this was one of the first
pyramids built for an Egyptian pharaoh
since the fall of the Middle Kingdom and
it was clearly designed as a symbol of
renewal of the Empire's great
legacy but it would also be the last
ever Pyramid built by an Egyptian
ruler after securing the Nile Delta
amoza marched North and even crossed the
Sinai smashing through the traditional
Heartland of the hixus people and
seizing territory in Palestine
in the region of modern
Gaza after that he returned to the
southern people of kush and pushed the
Empire's borders farther south than they
had ever been beyond the second cataract
to the River Island of Sai now in
Northern
Sudan from its lowest e Egypt had
suddenly reemerged as a major regional
power this was the age of the New
[Music]
Kingdom
during the five centuries of the New
Kingdom Egypt would reach its greatest
territorial extent and construct some of
its most impressive monuments and
artifacts despite recapturing Memphis
its Kings saw no reason to move the
capital again and so they now once again
ruled from the city of Thieves far up
the river in Upper
Egypt by now Egypt had also adopted the
technology of the horse drawn Chariot
from their hios foes and its armies were
now made up of powerful contingents of
these
vehicles during these centuries Egypt
saw the rule of its first great woman
Pharaoh hat shepsut who was one of its
most prolific Builders she constructed
the Towering Temple complex at carak and
the stately Mortuary Temple known as the
holy of
holies she also undertook a voyage in
five ships to the Land of Punt somewhere
in Africa and brought back incense trees
and other Goods to Egypt which she
celebrated in one
[Music]
inscription the ships returned with the
marvels of the Land of Punt and with all
the good Woods of tanut with heaps of
incense with trees producing green
fragrance with Ebony and pure ivory with
gold and green agots found in the land
of the AMU with hides of the Panthers of
the South never since the beginning of
the world have the like of these wonders
been brought by any
King the New Kingdom would also see some
of the most striking dramas emerge in
the Royal courts of Egypt of these none
have drawn so much attention as the
story of one Pharaoh he has been
described by some as a revolutionary by
others as a Visionary and by others
still as simply
insane he was a ruler named Aon hotep
IV Amon hotep came to the throne around
1350 BC he had inherited his name from
his father who had ruled as amunhotep
III like most Egyptian names it included
the name of a god Amon and it meant Amon
is
satisfied Amon had long been the god of
the city of Thieves and was considered
the god of fertility and of the wind but
when the hixus were expelled from Egypt
and thieves became the capital once more
this God Amon was given something of a
promotion he was unified with the sun
god Rah to create a compound deity now
known as Amun ra the perfect symbol of
the power of a new United
Egypt Amun Ra was depicted as a man
bearing a golden staff and wearing a
high crown and later would be shown with
blue skin
this new deity was placed at the head of
all the various gods that the Egyptians
worshiped the king of the Gods and
creator of the
universe one hymn to Amun describes the
Primacy of his
position Lord of Truth father of the
Gods maker of men creator of all animals
Lord of things that are creator of the
staff of
life
the Pharaoh Amon hotep IV would keep his
name for the first four years of his
rule but around his fifth year on the
throne he made the unprecedented
decision to change his Royal name that's
because he had a vision of a new system
of belief that he wanted to spread over
all of Egypt he wanted to do away with
the messiness of Egyptian religion and
the system of different gods in
different cities different temples and
ults and Priests he devised a new system
of worship that focused not on any God
but on the son itself which he seems to
have believed was his true
father this new God would be depicted as
a be impersonal disc showering the Earth
with beams of light it would be called
simply the orb or in Egyptian the
arton one surviving himm to the arton
perhaps even written by the Pharaoh
himself shows the enormous power this
new God was supposed to
have oh Soul God like whom there is no
other thou this create the world
according to thy
desire you are in my heart there is no
other who knows you every land Chatters
that is rising every
day around year five of his Reign the
Pharaoh Amon hotap abandoned his old
name that paid respect to the god Amon
and changed it to a new name for his new
God this new name meant effective spirit
for the arton he was now the Pharaoh
Aken
atan akatan is the first recorded person
in history to have started a new
religion by himself he was also the
first
monotheist in akatan Kingdom only the
arton could be worshiped temples to Amon
were eventually shut down and all
worship of the former God was ban the
king even sent out workmen and soldiers
to all corners of Egypt where they burst
into temples with hammers and chisels
and chipped the name of amoon off the
walls his determination to rid his
kingdom of Amon was so great that he
even sent workmen climbing to the top of
the Red Pyramid of snu to chip the name
of amoon from the pyramid's topmost
Capstone to the Egyptians used as they
were to plating a whole host of deities
with prayers and offerings this radical
shift must have seemed like a
frightening and risky gamble many must
have feared to turn their backs on their
old trusted gods and consort with this
new and untested
ideology but the king's word was the
king's word and for the most part they
seem to have fallen into
line at first akatan converted old
temples in thieves to the arton and even
began constructing some new ones but he
soon went off the
idea thieves' old temples were covered
with carvings and hieroglyphs praising
the other gods and the depth of their
history couldn't be erased
overnight thieves was also home to a
powerful Priestly class that resisted
his
reforms in answer to this problem akatan
took the remarkable decision to build an
entirely New Capital he would build it
out in the middle of of the desert at a
completely uninhabited location halfway
between Memphis and thieves he would
call this city The Horizon of the arton
or in Egyptian
aatan standing out on the bare and level
plain where he hoped to build his new
city the Pharaoh akatan gave the
following proclamation to his
courtiers the arton desires that there
be made for him a monument with an
eternal and everlasting
name it is Aton my father who gave me
counsel concerning it no official has
ever given me counsel not any of the
people who are in the entire land at AET
Aton I shall make the house of
Aton this new city would be furnished
with everything a royal Capital needed
palaces for akatan and his chief wife
nefatiti along with his four other wives
Gardens tombs administrative buildings
and workshops and of course a vast
Temple complex to the new God
arton construction of this city would
take at least 8 years and when it was
finished in the 12th year of his reign
akatan held a magnificent
ceremony the year was 1342
BC at his new capital akatan received
delegations from all over the region
from the Hittites from Syria and islands
in the Mediterranean like Cyprus and
Creet as well as from the Nubian lands
of Punt and Kush in the South all here
to Bear witness to the glory of his new
city and his successful conversion of
his
Empire the priests may have grumbled the
common people may have Fred but he had
finally done it the ceremony must have
been grand full of Celebration and pomp
musicians and dancers the burning of
incense and feasts of Fine
Foods we can imagine the foreign guests
listening to the singing of hymns like
the following to the new God arton
thou did create the world according to
thy desire all men cattle and wild
beasts whatever is on earth going upon
its feet and what is on high flying with
its wings the countries of Syria and
Nubia the land of Egypt thou sest every
man in his place thou
suppliestoner separate in speech and
their Natures as well everyone has his
food and his time of life is
reckoned but the consequences of this
piece of Royal pageantry were dire a
plague had been spreading around the
Middle East for some time now affecting
lands in Syria and the hittite empire in
what is now turkey
one group of texts written around this
time known as the hittite plague prayers
invoke the gods to deliver them from
This
Disaster for 20 years now people have
been dying in hati will the plague never
be removed from hati I cannot control
the worry in my heart I can no longer
control the anguish of my
soul with foreign dignitaries coming
from all over the region with large
entourages and doubtless groups of
slaves in tow a deadly dose of this
disease arrived that year in the heart
of Egypt and from there would have
spread all up and down the Nile if
akatan had hoped that this ceremony
would secure his people's confidence in
his new God then it couldn't have
backfired more
dramatically in the pandemic that
followed no one was safe
numerous deaths may even have occurred
within akatan family perhaps including
his mother his wife and three of his
daughters and if the situation was so
severe even in the relatively protected
Royal Court we can assume that in the
population at large the effects were
even more devastating for the people of
Egypt this incomprehensible disaster
must have seemed like the Judgment of
the old gods on the man who had so
arrogantly turned his back on them
akatan died only a few years later
around 1335 BC after 17 years of
rule after his death some members of his
family attempted to maintain the cult of
the arton in the now plague ravaged new
capital of
akatan they would take turns to rule for
the next four years but seemingly
without much success
now the whole empire seemed like it was
teetering on the brink of
collapse but eventually one of Akin
natan's Sons a boy of only 8 years old
came to the
throne his father had given him the
hopeful name to tank arton or living
image of the arton but he would not rule
under it for long turning his back on
his father's New Faith and to an
enormous celebration around the empire
in the third year of his rule he changed
his name to the one we now remember him
by the Living Image not of arton but of
the old God Amon now triumphantly
welcomed back by the people of Egypt his
name was tutank
[Music]
Amon
as symbolized by his change of name the
boy King Tuton Kon rode back a great
number of his fathers attempted reforms
he ended all worship of the god arton
and reinstated amoon to Supremacy in
thieves Tuton Kon lifted the ban on the
Cults of other gods and restored the
traditional privileges of the
priesthood many temples to the Aron in
thieves and elsewhere were tor TN down
and their painted bricks were used as
filler in the walls of other
temples everyone seemed to be in
agreement the whole sorry business of
akatan was better off
forgotten today the boy King tutan Kon
is perhaps the most famous of all the
Egyptian pharaohs more famous than the
great kufu and cfre of Giza or the
pharaoh's joser and snu who perfected
the pyramid form he's more famous than
camosa or akm MOA who reunited the
kingdom and expelled the hixus more
famous than his colorful father akatan
or the great Queen hat shepsut but
there's nothing in his Reign that really
warrants that level of recognition in
fact this boy King died while still a
teenager after only 9 years of
rule he does seem to have been a good
King
and popular and set Egypt back on course
after his father's erratic Reign but the
source of his Fame was really one of
absolute historical
accident when he died in 1323 BC the boy
King tutan Kon was buried in a tomb in
the Valley of the Kings it was not a
particularly resplendant Royal tomb and
a far cry from the Glorious pyramids of
the Old Kingdom but shortly after it was
sealed there was a chance flash flood in
this portion of the necropolis and the
doorway to the tomb was buried in sand
and rock this left it completely
concealed for the next
3,300 years tomb robbers would scour the
Valley of the Kings stealing from nearly
every one of the great Pharaoh's tombs
making away with their Treasures
removing their mummies and despoiling
their
decorations but buried in the sand tutan
kon's tomb remained sealed for this
reason it was completely untouched until
the year
1922 when it was uncovered by the
egyptologist Howard Carter and all its
artifacts were recovered to
International
astonishment today the most glorious of
these the golden burial mask of tutan
Kon is one of the most famous objects
from the ancient world a resplendent
image of Royal wealth and
power at times it can be hard to
remember that this golden image is also
a portrait of a boy who had power thrust
upon him in a time of upheaval and
strife looking up at us from the dark
depths of the
[Music]
ages
the New Kingdom of Egypt would reach its
highest point around 50 years after the
reign of tutan
Kon it would come during the rule of
perhaps the greatest Egyption Pharaoh he
came to the throne under the name rames
II but he would go down in history as
rames the
Great rames came to the throne at the
age of 14 in 1279
BC at the time Egypt's Mediterranean
Coast was being ravaged by groups of
pirates and he spent much of his early
rule dealing with this nuisance but he
is most famous for pushing the
boundaries of Egypt far to the North
into the region of
Syria over the preceding centuries a
powerful rival had grown up in the
mountains of what is today turkey and
was steadily spreading its influence in
all
directions this was the powerful hittite
Empire centered on their Hill Fortress
capital of
Kusa the Hittites were a relatively new
power in the region but their territory
was wealthy and
extensive they had mastered the use of
Chariots in Warfare turning them from
light hitandrun Vehicles into heavy
armored ship shock troops and for the
last two centuries Egypt had been
fighting increasingly bitter Wars with
them over who would control the region
of
Palestine in the fourth year of his
Reign Ramsey II gathered an
expeditionary force and marched across
the Sinai desert to Gaza and from there
marched
North one epic poem written about this
Expedition exalts in the enormous force
that rames
brought his majesty journeyed northward
his infantry and chariotry with him he
began to march on the good way every
foreign country was trembling before him
their chiefs were bringing their tribute
and all the rebels were coming bowing
down through a dread of the personality
of his
majesty Ram's aim was to capture the
strong Fortress city of Kadesh situated
along the Sandy banks on a fork of the
arones
river for years now cadesh had been
playing the Hittites and Egypt off
against one another allying first with
one then the other now rames was
determined to finally seize cadesh for
Egypt he marched North with four of his
divisions named after the gods Amon Rah
Seth and P with him he brought thousands
of Chariots and one unit of elite
Chariot Riders he sent by sea telling
them to land on the coast and ride
Inland to meet him on the day that he
arrived at
Kadesh at first everything seemed to be
going well on his way the pharaoh's
Scouts captured a pair of tribesmen from
the shasu people who told him that the
hittite King was cowering further to the
north he was afraid of the might of
Egypt they said he had left cadesh
defenseless excited by this news rames
threw all caution to the wind and
hastened northward to seize the city
with only one of his four divisions his
prided Amon troops but this would prove
to be a fatal
mistake rames didn't know it yet but
these shasu tribesmen were actually
agents of the hitti king sent to lure
him into a
trap when he arrived at Kadesh rames set
up his Camp beside a Stony Brook and his
Scouts set out into the surrounding
landscape to detect any threats some of
these Scouts ran into a pair of hittite
soldiers who had been lying low in the
undergrowth watching them they
skirmished and the Egyptians managed to
capture the
Hittites after perhaps a Stern beating
these men revealed what lay waiting for
the Egyptians nearby the full might of
the hittite armies amassed in an ambush
hidden behind the looming Fortress of
cadesh the cadesh poem records this
imposing
Force now the riched foe of hati had
come having gathered all foreign
countries to the very ends of the sea
the land of hati in its
entirety they covered the mountains and
The Valleys like the Grasshoppers with
their
multitudes he left neither silver nor
gold in his land but despoiled it of all
its possessions and gave them to all
foreign countries to bring them with him
to
combat rames flew into a rage with his
generals for allowing this to happen
happen he had hurried ahead with his
Amon Division and now he was critically
overstretched with his reinforcements in
the Rah division still on the
road the Hittites would not allow the
Egyptians to regroup before the raah
division could arrive a terrifying force
of 2,500 hittite chariots burst out of
hiding and swept across the river
plain hittite chariots were the tanks of
the their day heavy and armored their
Riders covered in chain mail down to
their
toes these chariots rolled in and
smashed into the raah
regiment who frantically tried to form a
shield wall the Hittites scattered this
division completely and then rounded on
the Egyptians
Camp rameses was surrounded cut off from
his reinforcements and now
outnumbered but in this Di situation he
recounts how he rallied his men and led
them in a desperate charge against the
enemy I found the 2,500 spans of
chariotry in whose midsts I was becoming
heaps of corpses before my horses not
one of them found his hand to fight for
their hearts quailed in their bodies
from Terror of me and all their arms
were powerless so they could not shoot
nor find their courage to seize their
[Applause]
javelins whether or not this self
aggrandizing account is an accurate
depiction of that day it's clear that
the tide did begin to
turn the Egyptian soldiers were Elite
Fighters and many of the hittite forces
may have been mercenaries or
conscripts after destroying the Rah
Division and sweeping into the Egyptians
Camp the Chariots became bogged down and
many of the hittite soldiers believing
the battle to be already over began
looting rather than press their
advantage more Egyptian reinforcements
were soon arriving from the south and as
the bloody afternoon wore on that
contingent of elite charioteers that had
been sailing up the coast also arrived
on the
scene the arrival of this Cavalry on the
horizon was enough to steal the resolve
of the Egyptian troops and break the wh
of the
Hittites rames gives a flid rendition of
what happened
next I made them plunge into the water
as crocodiles plunge for they were
falling upon their faces one on another
as I slew among them whom I desired Nei
neither could one look behind him nor
could another turn about and whoever of
them fell he could not raise
himself the hittite Army withdrew with
many of their soldiers pushed into the
arones
river when the next day dawned the two
sides clashed again but both had been
fatally weakened by the previous day's
fighting after after a few hours of
bloody Slaughter rames withdrew and the
hittite King sent him a peace
offer the pharaoh's hands were tied the
Egyptians lacked any Siege equipment to
breach the strong walls of cadesh and
the only option to take the city would
have been a lengthy Siege during which
Ramses would have found his forces
exposed to attack poorly supplied and
prone to encirclement
instead he decided to declare Victory
and March back to Egypt the Hittites in
turn also declared Victory and the City
of cadesh would slip out of ramses's
grasp despite the overflowing Praise of
rames and his glorious victory in the
cadesh poem The War actually ended with
a stalemate and the question of the city
remained
unresolved but it's clear that rameses
thought back to his role during the
battle with no small amount of pride and
he would decorate the walls of his
Temple at Abu simbel with a vast low
relief carving of every one of the
battles twists and
turns the war with the Hittites would
drag on for a further 15 years and
during this time Egypt would often
capture territory along the
Mediterranean Coast only to lose it
again the very next year before long
both sides grew weary of this grinding
conflict the war was finally brought to
an end with what has gone down in
history as the first written peace
treaty the text of which has
survived behold atus the ruler of the
Hittites binds himself by treaty to
rameses chosen one of Rah the Great
great ruler of Egypt beginning today so
that perfect peace and Brotherhood may
be created between us forever he being
in Brotherhood and peace with me and I
being in Brotherhood and peace with him
forever the treaty was written on Silver
tablets with both the Hittites and the
Egyptians being given a copy its text
was written in both hieroglyphics and
hittite cop form
but the two translations do have
slightly different wordings in a
diplomatic stroke of Genius the Egyptian
version claims that the Hittites had
come begging Egypt for peace which the
Egyptians graciously accepted while in
the hittite version it is the Egyptians
who asked to end the war with both sides
thus able to save face the destructive
conflict was allowed to come to an end
and nearly a century of relative peace
ensued despite the pride Ramsey took in
his battles today it is this peace
treaty that we most remember and a
replica of it hangs on the walls of the
United Nations Headquarters in New
York after what seemed like a lucky
Escape at cadesh rames would turn his
attention away from war and towards
Construction
he spent the next Decades of his rule
building temples and monuments up and
down Egypt and today his name is the one
that appears on the most surviving
monuments of any
Pharaoh this is partly due to his
prolific building campaign but also due
to the fact that he ensured his name was
inscribed more deeply in the stone than
any other pharaoh so deep that it could
never be
erased
rames II would rule for a total of 66
years and would be remembered as perhaps
Egypt's greatest Pharaoh his full
Egyptian name was usat saten rames which
the Greeks would later render into a
name they found easier to
pronounce they would call him oim
mandus more than a thousand years later
the Greek writer doodas of Sicily would
visit Egypt and write an account of
visiting one Monument to rames
[Music]
II at its entrance there is a pylon
constructed of variegated Stone to
plethora in breadth and 45 cubits High
the inscription upon it runs King of
Kings am I oim
andus if anyone would know how great I
am and where I lie let him surpass one
of my
Works rames would also build a new
capital for his Empire and with his
military Ambitions lying in the north he
decided to place it in the northeast of
the Nile Delta and in characteristic
fashion he named it after himself
calling it per rames or the house of
rames one Egyptian poem would celebrate
the beauty of this new
city the residence is Pleasant in life
its field is full of everything good it
is full of supplies and food every day
it's ponds with fish and its lakes with
birds its Meadows are verdant with grass
its banks bear dates its melons are
abundant on the Sands its granaries are
so full of barley and Emma wheat that
they come near to the sky red wedge fish
swim in the canal of the resident city
which live on lotus
flowers this city of per Ramses has long
been associated with the city of rames
referred to in the Hebrew Book of Exodus
the second book of the Hebrew
Bible Exodus describes a population of
enslaved Hebrews forced to work on the
construction of the
city the reality of The Exodus story has
long been debated and most historians
now consider it to be a piece of ancient
literature there is no evidence for a
large population of Hebrew slaves ever
living in Egypt or that the city of per
rames was built by slaves at all more
likely it was built using the Egyptians
usual combination of skilled Artisans
and seasonal peasant
laborers but with the the proximity of
the Nile Delta to the lentine coast it's
certainly not impossible that some of
these laborers were Hebrew people who
had traveled across the Sinai to sell
their labor in
Egypt if that were the case then for one
reason or another they left no
impression in the archaeological record
but perhaps printed an indelible mark on
our Collective
imaginations when Ramses finally died in
1213 BC he was probably nearly 90 years
old his Reign had been one of Egypt's
Golden Ages but his long rule had once
again created That Old King problem all
of his heirs were now also old men by
the time of his death 12 of his oldest
Sons had already died and now his 13th
son took the throne at the age of about
70 he was the Pharaoh
merar but only a few years into this
man's Reign Egypt was attacked by a
devastating new
enemy these were the Libyan people to
the west of the Nile
Delta the king of Libya a man named mer
Ray had seemingly planned his attack for
some time all of a sudden a large Libyan
Army suddenly flooded through Egypt's
Northwestern border and they were
reinforced with groups of people from
all over the Mediterranean perhaps from
Greece Sardinia Sicily and elsewhere
across the sea these were a diverse
group of peoples that had suddenly begun
to appear in increasing numbers across
the Eastern
Mediterranean they would later become
known as the sea
peoples the pharaoh mpar remembers this
event on one carved
Stell The Wretched Fallen chief of Libya
Maria son of dead has fallen upon the
country of tunu with his Bowman Sheran
sheesh EES looker teresh taking the best
of every Warrior and every man of war of
his country he has brought his wife and
his children leaders of the camp and he
has reached the western boundary in the
fields of
Pera the Pharaoh medar defeated this
Invasion and as a warning to any others
who would try such a surprise attack he
had many of the invading soldiers
impaled along the road into
Memphis the princes are prostrate saying
Mercy not one raises his head among the
nine bows desolation is for to henu hati
is pacified plundered is the Canan with
every evil har become a
widow all lands together they are
pacified but these lands would not stay
pacified for
long
after the death of the Pharaoh merar
around 1204 BC Egypt entered a period of
civil Strife with the descendants of
rames fighting over who would take the
crown against this backdrop the entire
region also once again began to
experience a series of record
droughts what caused this climate shift
is
uncertain as we saw in our second
episode on the Bronze Age collapse the
cause may have been volcanic with a
large eruption taking place in the
Icelandic volcano of hecka around this
time others have proposed that an
eruption in Sicily around 1300 BC may
have been to blame or that the super
volcano Thea in Santorini may have
resumed some activity some 500 years
after its last enormous eruption the
cause may not have been volcanic at all
and could have been due to variations in
the sun's activity or weather systems in
the Atlantic depriving the Mediterranean
of moisture the reality was much as it
is today the planet's climate system is
fragile interconnected and chaotic and
even relatively small changes in its
equilibrium can have devastating
effects during this time formerly green
lands became dry and arid and more
plants suited to Desert Landscapes
flourished analysis of sediment cores
and oxygen Isotopes in cave mineral
deposits have all shown that the 13th
and 12th centuries BC saw much less rain
than the preceding
centuries alongside this scientific
evidence we can see marks of severe
drought in the Region's written records
too
Egypt's great Rivals the Hittites in
their Stony mountains were hit
particularly hard by the
drought one hittite text has come down
to us that seems to capture the spirit
of this age and it is known as the myth
of
telepinu it comes from a poetic
convention known as The Vanishing God
myth which describes how a certain deity
is so offended by the misdeed of
humanity that he flies into a fit of
sorrow and abandons his
duties telepinu was a god of farming
fertility and the weather the beginning
of the text has been lost so we don't
know what it was Humanity did to provoke
his rage but the poem describes its
deadly
consequences thereupon soot beset the
windows smoke beset the house the ashes
lay crammed on the Hearth off stalked
TPU grain and abundance he took away
from field and Meadow off to the copses
stalked
tupenu and in a cops he buried
himself forth with the seed ceased to
yield produce oxen sheep and Men ceased
to breed while even those that had
conceived did not bear hillsides were
bare
trees were bare and put forth no new
branches pastures were bare Springs ran
dry a famine arose in the land men and
gods alike were about to perish of
hunger while the Egyptians may have
celebrated this weakening of their great
rival in Egypt the situation was hardly
any better one text dated to around the
year year 1200 BC is called the lament
to amoon and it stands as a whale of
sorrow in a darkening
Age come to me Father amoon Protect Me
In This Bitter year of
Confrontation God shines in the sun yet
he will not shine winter crowds hard
upon summer months happen backwards
disheveled hours Lurch drunken by those
cut down in high places cry out to you
Amon these words came on The Poisoned
air spoken by herdsmen in fields and
marshes by those who beat clothes on the
banks of the river by District police
deserting their precincts by horned
beasts on our burning
deserts from this period of unrest and
the chaos in Egypt's Royal Court which
lasted for about a century a military
strong man named setak would eventually
rise to power he would rule for only 3
years before dying and passing the
throne on to his young
son this boy was the Empire's Last Hope
to turn around its floundering
fortunes and if such a Hope was to be
sustained there was only one name he
could possibly rule
under his parents would name him after
his great predecessor who had ruled R
nearly a century before and fought at
the Battle of Kadesh and so this boy
would rule as rameses
thei this new boy King rameses was a
determined and tenacious ruler and it's
clear that he openly admired and sought
to emulate the legendary pharaoh of old
he even went so far as to name all his
own Sons After the sons of rameses II
and also gave them all the same
positions in his
court it was clear he wanted to do
everything he could to recreate the
Glory Days that had slipped out of
Egypt's grasp as he writes in one of his
inscriptions Rejoice ye oh Egypt to the
height of Heaven for I am ruler rer of
the South and North upon the throne of
atum the gods have appointed me to be
king over Egypt to be Victor to expel
them for her from the countries they
decreed to me the kingdom while I was a
child and my reign is full of
Plenty under other circumstances rames
might have been one of Egypt's great
rulers but the entire region was soon to
be convulsed in a series of bitter
Wars one of the great drivers of these
conflicts was the loose collection of
peoples that had first appeared in the
reign of the Pharaoh mapar and who are
known as the sea
peoples these Invaders were now
descending on the entire region in ever
greater numbers apparently spurred by
widespread crop failures in northern and
western Europe already powerful trading
cities like the port town of ugarit had
been attacked by sea seemingly by
complete surprise and they were
destroyed so thoroughly that they were
never reoccupied
the Egyptians great Rivals the Hittites
were now on the brink of collapse as
trade networks around the region went
into
freefall rames remembers this time of
strife as these Northern Invaders
descended on the
coast the countries the Northerners in
their Isles were Disturbed Swept Away in
battle not one stood before their lands
from Keta kemish arvat alasa they were
wasted they set up a camp in one place
in Amore they desolated his people and
his land like that which is
not when news of the sea people's
attacks came to rames he would have been
Pharaoh for about 8 years he had already
repelled two further invasions from
Libya and must have been rising in
confidence but the news troubled him and
soon he got word that the fleet of the
sea peoples was on the move and were
heading to Egypt as he accounts in the
inscription on his Mortuary Temple at
medinet
Habu they came with fire prepared before
them forward to Egypt their main support
was peleset theel shees denen and Wes
their lands were United and they laid
their hands upon the land as far as the
circle of the earth their hearts were
confident full of their
plans rames knew that these attackers
would have to be stopped and he decided
that he would make his stand at the
mouth of the Nile the Lush fertile
Delta he would have to play to what
strengths the Egyptian Army still had in
this challenging
terrain he decided to lay an ambush and
give the sea peoples a surprise attack
of Their
Own
now it happened through this God the
Lord of gods that I was prepared an
armed to trap them like wild foul I
equipped my Frontier at Z prepared
before them the Chiefs the captains of
infantry the Nobles I caused to equip
the harbor mouths like a strong wall
with warships galles and
barges they were manned complet
completely from bow to stern with
Valiant Warriors bearing their arms
soldiers of all the choicest of Egypt
being like lines roaring upon the
mountaintops their horses were quivering
in their every limb ready to crush the
countries under their
feet as the enemy's ships amassed rames
gathered archers on the banks supported
by spearmen and Cavalry in their
thousands all concealed in the Reeds the
tension must have been tremendous all
the soldiers of the Egyptian Army
holding their breath and waiting for
that first sign of an enemy
ship then at last a sail was
cited after that came another and
another until the whole Fleet of the sea
peoples was in sight the Egyptians must
have been able to hear the creek of
10,000 ORS
the beating of the drums the shouts of
the helmsmen and
soldiers then once the ca people's ships
were within range rames
struck arrows flew out of the Reeds and
rained down on the
ships panicked the Invaders attempted to
land on the banks but as they did the
Egyptian spearmen appeared out of the
tree line and met them with a shield
wall while the enemy was held at Bay the
Egyptian Navy sailed in down the
river those who reached my boundry their
heart and their soul are finished
forever and ever as for those who had
assembled before them on the sea the
full flame was in their front before the
harbor mouths and a wall of metal upon
the shore surrounded them they were
draged overturned and laid low upon the
beach slain and made heaps from Stern to
Bow of their GS while all their things
were cast upon the
Water thus I turned back the waters to
remember Egypt and when they even
mention my name in their land may it
consume them with
fear the pharaoh's plan had worked the
Egyptians were the first people to turn
back these seagoing Invaders and stop
their Campaign Of
Destruction ramses's inscription at
Medina Habu ends on the following
triumphant
note Rejoice ye o Egypt of the height of
Heaven for I am ruler of the South and
North upon the throne of atum I have
expelled your mourning which was in your
heart and I have made you dwell in peace
Those whom I have have overthrown shall
not
return but despite their Victory the
land of the Pharaohs now stood alone in
a devastated
region virtually every other society
around them had been gutted and reduced
to Ash numerous long established
civilizations the mean Greeks the
Hittites ugarit and Babylon had
collapsed and civil order had given way
to chaos the precarious trade routes on
which they had all relied to supply them
with bronze and other Commodities were
now broken and Egypt's economy went into
a steep and Unstoppable
decline by the end of this period which
has become known as the late Bronze Age
collapse Egypt was a shadow of its
former
self as other enemies encroached on its
borders Egypt was able to fight them off
but its treasury became so depleted that
it never fully recovered its Imperial
power the first workers strike in
recorded history happened during the
29th year of Ramsey's III's Reign when
Egypt could no longer provide food
rations for its Elite Artisans who were
constructing the king's tomb in the
village of De El Medina the lack of
rations went on so long that the workers
eventually marched through the town
shouting the following
chant we're hungry there's no more
clothing no more oil no more fish no
more vegetables send word to the
Pharaoh if food was not reaching these
crucial workers we can only imagine the
dire situation in The Wider Kingdom the
dispute dragged on for weeks with one
leader of the protest even threaten
threatening to damage a royal Monument
if they were not paid it was a threat
that they would never have dared to make
unless the authority of the Pharaoh was
beginning to be seriously
[Music]
undermined rames III ruled for another
two decades after his battle with the
sea peoples for a total reign of 31
years but by the year 1156 BC some
members of his family were beginning to
get
impatient in the Egyptian court all of
the women the king's wives and mother
and other consorts all lived together in
a large Palace complex with its own
land this was convenient for the king
but it could also encourage courtly
Intrigue there was a strict hierarchy to
to the pharaoh's queens and everyone
knew that the children of his main wife
were to be his heirs before any others
some of the women who were lower down on
this ladder could at times resort to
plotting to improve their stations and
perhaps get their own Sons on the throne
instead one of these women was a queen
named
ti ti was a secondary wife of rameses
and her son Penta was not in line for
the
throne in order to remedy this situation
she began a plot that would go down in
history as the Haram
conspiracy soon she brought in other
members of the king's household and even
high ranking members of the government
as one later Papyrus
records They are the abomination of the
land the great Criminal Who who was then
chief of the chamber was in collusion
with t and the women of the harim he had
made common cause with them he had begun
to bring out their words to their
mothers and their brothers who were
there saying stir up the people incite
Rebellion against their
lord alarmingly one of the palace women
had written to her brother named cim
waset a commander of Nubian troops in
the South and gained his support for
their plot others had even turned to
Supernatural methods making wax Effigies
of the king's bodyguards and laying
curses on them to help their
scheme their plan was clear to kill
rames and install Queen Tia's son Penta
as
Pharaoh the date they chose chose to
strike was during the annual ceremony
known as the beautiful Festival of the
valley which was held in thieves every
year at the new moon of the second month
of the harvesting season of
Shemu during this Festival which was one
of the biggest of the year the Pharaoh
would go down to the river in a grand
and colorful procession carrying the
statues of the three gods of Thieves
Amon M and konu he would then board his
Royal barge and sail with the statues
down to the thean necropolis to visit
his Grand Temple as one inscription by a
thean priest
describes we go giving praise to amoon
kissing the ground before the Lords of
the Gods on his festivals the first day
of Shemu shining on the day of voyaging
to the
valley here the citizens would give
offerings of food and drink and flour
hours as the boats sailed on the river
with three
statues as the riotous days long
Festival progressed the plotters took
advantage of the disruption to make a
strike at the
king it was day 15 of Shemu when the
Pharaoh was relaxing in the Royal Haram
in the western Tower of medinet Habu
perhaps thinking ahead to his role in
the coming festivities when a group of
assassins crept up on him with
knives their attack was Swift and brutal
modern scanning of rames III's mummy
reveals that his throat was cut right to
the bone with a sharp weapon severing
the trachea esophagus and major blood
vessels death would have followed within
seconds rames has no defensive wounds
suggest sugesting that he was caught
completely
unawares but curiously his big toe was
severed at the time of the
attack this seems like an unlikely
injury to sustain during a struggle and
studies of his mummy have shown that the
embas fashioned him a prosthetic toe to
take with him into the Afterlife this
suggests that the original toe was never
recovered perhaps indicating that
someone took it as proof that he was
dead or
as a Grizzly
trophy rames III had saved Egypt from
the sea peoples but now he Lay Dying in
a pool of his own blood betrayed by his
own
family but The Conspirator plot would
not go as planned in the aftermath of
the bloody assassination the son of
rames III was able to crush the coup and
Seize the Throne the plotters were all
put on trial as well as any who had
heard about the conspiracy but failed to
report it in all 28 people were executed
and as a final punishment they were even
cruy renamed after their
deaths the brother of one of the
plotters who had commanded his Nubian
troops in the South was originally named
cim waset a name which meant came from
thieves but after his execution he was
renamed BM waset or evil in thieves
another's name marir meant beloved of
Rah but he was given the somewhat
spiteful new name meedu Rah or Rah hates
him although order had been restored to
the royal succession Egypt was in a much
reduced State the death of Ramses was
followed by years of bickering among his
his
hirs three of his sons would become king
at different times each feeling the need
to memorialize him and Shore up their
own legitimacy by reigning as rames I
4th 6th and
eth in fact the next eight pharaohs in a
row would all be named rames after the
slain King but many of these rulers were
ineffectual and reigned for only a few
years each
meanwhile Egypt was increasingly beset
by continuing droughts lack of seasonal
flood waters famines civil unrest and
official
corruption against this backdrop by the
rule of rames I 11th a new power had
begun to fill the vacuum left by Royal
Authority
these were the high Priests of amoon in
[Music]
thieves this priesthood had become not
only very powerful but exceedingly
wealthy through a centuries long game of
acquisition the Amon priests now
controlled 2/3 of all the temple lands
in Egypt and 90% of all Egypt's ships
along with mountains of
gold on top of that they were the chief
prophets and interpreters of the god
Amun Ra's will wielding a great deal of
influence over the Kings and their
decisions over the last centuries they
had changed the rules of the priesthood
so that they could pass their positions
on to their sons essentially becoming a
kind of feudal royalty in the baking hot
lands of Upper Egypt one one inscription
on the tomb of a high priest named neb
enf describes the power of this new
hereditary
role you are now high priest of Amun his
Treasury and his Granary are under your
seal you are chief executive of his
Temple and every Foundation of his is
under your
Authority the house of hathor Lady of
Dinda shall now be under the authority
of your son as heir to the offices of of
your forefathers the position which you
have occupied
hitherto soon the high priests in
thieves became the deao rulers of Upper
Egypt even having themselves buried in
Grand tombs and commanding their own
armies in many ways the Pharaoh had
become something of an
irrelevance and perhaps for that reason
there would not be a Ramsey I
12th with the death of RAM the 11th the
Egyptian New Kingdom finally fractured
less than 80 years after the Victorious
battle with the sea
peoples Egypt would never regain its
former
[Music]
power for the next four centuries
Egypt's influence would undergo a steady
but Unstoppable
decline one text written around this
time is called the tale of wenam moon it
describes an Egyptian Diplomat who
travels to the north to collect some
cedar wood as tribute from The
Phoenician city of
biblos but while there he finds that the
name of the Pharaoh no longer holds the
kind of sway it used
to when Amon is robbed on his journey
and appeals to the ruler of biblos for
help that morning when I had risen I
went to where the prince was and said to
him I've been robbed in your Harbor now
you are the prince of this land you are
the one who controls it search for my
money indeed the money belongs to amanra
king of Gods lord of the lands he said
to me are you serious are you joking
indeed I do not understand the demand
you make to
me to make matters worse the king of
biblos refuses to pay the tribute of
Cedarwood that the Pharaoh
demands whether this story relates a
true event or is simply a piece of
literature historians aren't sure but
either way it points to the much reduced
state of Egypt's standing in the world
something that had clearly become common
[Music]
knowledge the 21st Dynasty that ruled
from the northern Nile Delta through
much of the 8th Century BC were even
descended from Libyan Invaders peoples
from along the North African Coast to
the
West while the earliest of these Libyan
pharaohs adopted classical Egyptian
names by the 22nd and 23rd Dynasty
they reverted to giving their children
more ethnically Libyan names and even
wearing Libyan feathered headdresses to
underline their
identity still these Libyan kings were
an unruly Bunch who held close to their
old tribal loyalties and were frequently
distracted by Waring amongst themselves
and their own Lords and Generals
meanwhile the high Priests of Amon
continued to rule Southern Egypt from
thieves but even further to the south in
the lands of Nubia another Power was
Rising this was the Nubian Kingdom of
kush as one of the two main African
kingdoms to the south of Egypt Kush was
located at the fourth cataract of the
Nile
around the region of Sudan
today for centuries now this Nubian
Kingdom had been crushed beneath the
boot of Egypt repeated Expeditions up
the Nile had seen Egyptian armies stamp
out any sign of a powerful rival
appearing in East
Africa but now with the New Kingdom of
Egypt fractured and the Libyan Kings
ruling it in the north fighting amongst
themselves the kushites were free to
build their own power
base during Egypt's many attempts to
invade and hold on to the lands in Nubia
Egypt had left a number of powerful
fortresses to the kushites one of these
had even become the capital of kush the
city of
Napata but the Egyptians had also left
behind something else that is their
religion the upper classes in Kush had
long adopted Egyptian gods and forms of
worship kushite rulers even referred to
themselves as the son of
Amon when Herodotus traveled down the
Nile in the following centuries he
described this region which he knew as
Ethiopia above elephantine the country
now begins to be inhabited by Ethiopians
and half the people of the island are
Ethiopians and and half
Egyptians near to the island is a great
lake on the shores of which dwell Nomad
Ethiopians the people of the place
worship no other gods but Amun and
Osiris these they greatly honor and they
have a place of divination sacred to
[Music]
amoon while Egypt had stopped building
pyramids more than a thousand years
earlier kushite Kings had taken up the
building of pyramids of Their Own in
classic Egyptian
style in some ways Kush had become more
Egyptian than the
Egyptians the kingdom was becoming
wealthy too its economy boosted by the
Nubian gold mines it controlled and
trade with subsaharan
Africa this wealth soon led to a
powerful
Army one king of kush named kashta would
seize upon the opportunity that the
situation
afforded while the Libyan kings of Egypt
squabbled and fought among themselves
kastar worked to gain influence over the
high Priests of Thieves eventually he
had his own daughter appointed to the
powerful title of God's wife of Amon in
the Great temple of
Thieves once she was in that position
she moved to consolidate her power and
claimed thieves and all Upper Egypt for
her father's Kingdom of kush
the Libyan kings in the Nile Delta
distracted by their civil wars did
nothing to stop them Upper Egypt was now
ruled by
[Music]
Nubians when the kushite king kter died
his son PA inherited what was now the
kushite Empire sometime around the 720s
BC King Pi marched his Nubian armies
down the Nile and conquered the fracture
state of Lower
Egypt PA was clearly pragmatic in his
approach and allowed any local Governors
to stay in their positions so long as
they swore allegiance to him a victory
Stell that he carved records his
victories which he dedicates to the old
Egyptian
gods here what I have done in exceeding
the
ancestors I am the king the representa
of God who issued from the womb marked
as ruler who is feared by those greater
than he whose father knew and whose
mother perceived even in the egg that he
would be ruler beloved of the Gods the
son of Rah beloved of a
[Music]
moon his son shitu solidified these
conquests and United Egypt once more for
the next Century EG Egypt would be ruled
by the 25th Dynasty the Nubian
pharaohs over the decades that followed
these Nubian rulers showed an
enthusiastic adoption of Egyptian
culture they used the Egyptian language
gave each other Egyptian names and
worshiped the Egyptian gods with
apparent
devotion they even embarked on an
enthusiastic program of pyramid building
in in Nubia the first that the region
had seen in centuries if nothing quite
like on the grand scale of the Old
Kingdom but this flourishing of Egyptian
culture would not last long that's
because to the north a power had finally
risen that would eclipse the Egyptian
Empire for
good that was the Empire of
Assyria
as we saw in our 13th episode Assyria
had Arisen in the Valley of the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers in Mesopotamia and
by the 7th Century BC was perhaps the
most powerful Empire on
Earth they routinely amassed armies of
more than 100,000 soldiers and under the
reign of the paranoid King esar hadon
they were now pressing their power far
along the Mediterranean Coast and soon
they dreamed of bringing it to the banks
of the Nile
itself the Nubian pharaoh who would face
them was a man named
tahara tahara was the fifth King of the
Nubian 25th Dynasty and he was clearly
proud of his Heritage and his skin color
he made sure that statues he
commissioned were carved from hard black
granite polished smooth he had come to
Egypt as a young prince and had been
chosen to rule after the death of the
previous Pharaoh as he writes in one
inscription I was brought from Nubia
among the Royal brothers that his
majesty had brought as I was with him he
liked me more than all his brothers and
his children so that he distinguished me
I won the heart of all the Nobles and
was loved by all it was only after the
Royal Hawk had flown to Heaven that I
received to the crown in
Memphis curiously tahaka was also a
believer in the benefits of longdistance
running and insisted that all his
soldiers engaged in nighttime Marathon
practices the king himself was on
Horseback to see his army running when
he exercised with them on the desert
behind Memphis in the 9th hour of the
night they reached the great lake at the
hour of Sunrise and they returned to the
residence in the third hour of the
day this extreme stamina would serve
them well and he would engage in
successful assaults on Libyan positions
across the desert and capture territory
in
Palestine throughout his Reign tahaka
was lucky a series of exceptional Nile
floods led to a period of abundant
crops funds were clearly so forthcoming
that he donated large amounts of gold to
the Temple of Amon and restored several
religious centers as one of his
inscriptions
boasts as his majesty is the one who
loves the God he spends the day in Lies
by Night seeking what is useful to the
gods building their temples fallen into
Decay giving birth to their structures
as in the Primeval Times building their
storehouses endowing altars presenting
them with offerings of fine gold silver
copper now the heart of his majesty is
satisfied with doing what is beneficent
to them every day this land is inundated
in his time as it was in the time of the
Lord of all every man sleeping until
dawn and never saying oh I wish I
had Egypt was now of a size and
stability that it hadn't seen since the
collapse of the New Kingdom almost 400
years earlier it must have looked like
the dawn of a new era of
prosperity but this luck was not to
last in the year 674 BC in Tara's 17th
year on the throne news came of a
terrifying Army approaching from the
north this horde belonged to King esah
hadon of
Assyria
[Music]
few foes had ever beaten the Assyrians
on the battlefield and fear must have
spread up and down the
Nile but somehow against the odds tahara
was able to repel this Force the later
Greek historian Herodotus records a
Fantastical story in which the invading
Assyrian army was attacked by a horde of
nighttime
pests where the road comes into Egypt
there enemies came and during the night
were overrun by a horde of field mice
that GED Quivers and bows and the
handles of shields with the result that
many were killed fleeing unarmed the
next day for this reason to this day a
statue to the Egyptian king stands in a
temple with a mouse in his hand
what exactly this account records is
difficult to tell perhaps it was an
outbreak of plague among the Assyrian
army that forced them to return home
perhaps it was even a daring nighttime
Ambush by Tara's men conditioned as they
were to run long distances in the middle
of the night strike and then disappear
into the
darkness with their Camp smashed and
their army in disarray the Assyrian army
would have been pursued by Egyptian
chariots right back to their
borders but we may never know perhaps
unsurprisingly the Assyrian sources make
no mention of what must have been a
humiliating
defeat the sting of this embarrassment
was clearly sufficient that 3 years
later King esah hadon amassed an even
larger Assyrian army and marched back to
Egypt this time there was no standing in
its
way the Assyrians flooded into the Nile
Delta and tahaka fled from Memphis and
into the South the Assyrian Advance was
so Speedy that the Pharaoh was not able
to evacuate his family when he left the
city esah adon's troops took Memphis and
the Assyrian King wrote The Following
gloating inscription about his victory
I slew multitudes of his men and I smote
him five times with the point of my
Javelin with wounds from which there
were no Recovery Memphis his Royal City
in half a day with mines tunnels
assaults I besieged I captured I
destroyed I devastated I burned with
fire his Queen his Haram his Heir and
the rest of his sons and daughters his
property and his Goods his horses his
cattle his sheep in countless numbers I
carried off to
Assyria the root of kush I tore up out
of Egypt and not one therein escaped to
submit to me over all of Egypt I
appointed a new Kings viceo Governors
commandants overseers and scribes my
Royal tribute and tax yearly without
ceasing I imposed upon
them but if ESO hadon had hoped to
easily absorb Egypt into his Empire he
was
mistaken just a year later the Nubian
King tahara reappeared in the South
reinforced with troops from the kingdom
of
kush numerous Governors that esah hadan
had installed immediately reverted their
loyalties and the whole Assyrian
Conquest looked like it might be
undone enraged King esah hadon marched
back back to Egypt to crush this Rebel
King but his health failed on the
journey and he died in the city of haran
without reaching
Egypt esah hadon son who took the throne
was the Assyrian King ashard banipal
virtually his first act as King was to
gather an army and March to the
rebellious province of Egypt to finish
what his father had
started and aob banipal easily
overwhelmed the now weakened Egyptian
forces recaptured Memphis and in 663 BC
returned again to crush another round of
rebellions this time he marched South up
the Nile River and bore down on the
ancient capital of
Thieves by that time the Nubian King
Tara had died and his nephew tantam Mani
sat on the precarious Throne of Egypt
tanani met the Assyrians in battle but
he was defeated and with him the last of
Egypt's hope would
die the Assyrian army now rounded on the
defenseless city of
Thieves asob banipal records what
happened next on one carved
cylinder this city the whole of it I
conquered it with the help of Asher and
ishar silver gold precious stones all
the wealth of the palace Rich cloth
precious linen great horses supervising
men and women two obelisks of Splendid
electrum weighing 2,500 talant the doors
of the temples eye tore from their bases
and carried them off to
Assyria with this weighty booty I left
thieves
against Egypt and Kush I have lifted my
Spear and shown my
power the Assyrian sack of thieves was
the symbolic end of Egyptian
power though Assyria would not hold
Egypt for long and would itself collapse
within only about 50 years Egyptian
esteem would never truly recover a
Century later Egypt was conquered by the
Persian aeonid Empire and in 343 BC it
was conquered Again by the Macedonian
forces of Alexander the
Great when Alexander's Empire collapsed
Egypt would be left in the hands of one
of his ex-generals toomy SOA for the
next three centuries Egypt would be
ruled by his Greek toic Dynasty who
spoke Greek and mostly refused to learn
the native Egyptian
language these tommies were still in
power When the tide of Roman expansion
swept across North Africa and finally
over
Egypt the last independent ruler of toic
Egypt had a name that in Greek meant
Glory of her father from Clos meaning
glory and Patra meaning father her name
was
Cleopatra it's unclear if Cleopatra had
any Egyptian ancestry as her mother is
unknown but she did at least make an
effort to learn Egyptian as plutar
remembers it was a pleasure merely to
hear the sound of her voice with which
like an instrument of many strings she
could pass from one language to another
so that there were few of the the
Barbarian Nations that she answered by
an interpreter to most of them she spoke
herself as to the Ethiopians Hebrews
Arabians syrians parthians and many
others whose language she had learned
which was all the more surprising
because most of the Kings her
predecessors scarcely gave themselves
the trouble to acquire the Egyptian
tongue when Rome finally invaded and
occupied Egypt Cleopatra apparently
committed suicide side most likely by
drinking poison or scratching herself
with a needle dipped in toxin the more
flid and famous rendition of her using a
venomous snake to kill herself was
suggested by some ancient writers and
whether true or not has proved
irresistible to generations of poets
including most famously William
Shakespeare with her death in August of
the Year 30 BC the final vestage of
independent Egyptian power died
too on the day of her death Cleopatra
stood at the height of more than 3,000
years of Egyptian history to her the
Great Pyramid of Giza was now more than
2,500 years old meaning that Cleopatra
lived closer to our time than she did to
the building of the Great Pyramid by
more than 500 years
is as Egypt came under ever more foreign
influence its ancient culture gradually
underwent a
transformation over the following
centuries as the Greek alphabet became
more prominent the knowledge of how to
read hieroglyphic
was slowly lost as one medieval Arab
visitor
records I asked why the inscriptions
which cover the pyramids and the temples
were
indecipherable he answered since the
Learned men and those who us this
writing have disappeared and Egypt has
been occupied by a succession of foreign
peoples the Greek alphabet in writing
have prevailed and thus they lost the
understanding of the writing of their
ancestors
the last known hieroglyphic inscription
was written in the year 394 ad at the
Temple of file built on an island near
the Cataract of the Nile at
Aswan by then the now christianized
Roman Empire had banned the worship of
pagan gods in Egypt's temples but this
religious site was just outside of
Rome's borders and so worship of the the
ancient gods continued here in the last
of Egypt's great
temples here the names of Rah and P
Anubis and haor Amon and bastet Seth and
Horus would still be spoken and sung the
incense still burned the cats still fed
the offerings still
given but this island Temple was
increasingly isolated surrounding Ed by
the crashing Waters of a fast changing
world the last hieroglyphic inscription
records the mournful wish of one scribe
named nesm ER Akim wishing that his
inscription would endure forever just
like the carvings of his long dead
ancestors before
mulus son of Horus by the hand of nzeta
Kem son of nesm the second priest of
Isis for All Time and
Eternity words spoken by man dulus lord
of the abaton great
God as the last ever inscription of its
kind in some ways he got his wish but
it's likely that by the time he chipped
this message into the temple wall few
people alive would know how to read it
as far as we know the art of the
hieroglyph died with
him the temple was finally closed at
some point in the 530s by the Byzantine
emperor Justinian and it was converted
into a Christian Church to St
Steven the age of ancient Egypt had well
and truly come to an
[Music]
end
some 1,400 years later in the year
1818 the Romantic poet Percy Bish shell
would enter into a friendly competition
with his friend the poet Horus Smith
they had both read in a London newspaper
about the coming arrival in the British
Museum of a remarkable fragment of a
statue brought by ship from the ramum
Mory temple in thieves in Upper
Egypt it was the head and torso of a
statue of Egypt's greatest Pharaoh the
hero of the battle of cadesh rames
II the statue was one of a pair that had
stood at the doorway of his
Temple European Colonial Powers had long
been hungering after that fragment of
statue Napoleon bonapart had even tried
to remove it during his time in Egypt in
1798 but he found its bulk of black
diorite too heavy to
shift now with wooden rollers and
hundreds of workmen pulling ropes the
British team hauled the statue to the
banks of the Nile where it was
transported down the river and on to
London after reading about this statue
Smith and Shelly agreed to a wager they
would each write a poem inspired by it
and they would base their work on an
extract from the writings of the Greek
historian diodorus of Sicily who had
once visited Ramsey II's temple in
thieves unfortunately for Horus Smith
history has decisively concluded their
competition as his poem is little
remembered but Shell's poem has become a
classic one of the greatest and most
well-known songs sonets in the English
language titled oie mandus it is a poem
that has come to stand as an emblem of
the vain glorious pride of rulers the
inevitable downfall of tyrants the awe
inspiring power of time and the
transience of all
things I met a traveler from an antique
land who said two V fast and trunkless
legs of Stone Stand in the desert near
them on the sand half sunk a shattered
Visage lies whose frown and wrinkled lip
and sneer of cold command tell that its
sculptor well those passions R which yet
survive stamped on those lifeless things
the hand that mocked them and the heart
that fed and on the pedestal these words
appear my name is oim mandas King of
Kings look on my Works ye Mighty and
despair nothing beside remains round the
decay of that colossal wreck boundless
and bare the lone and level Sands
stretch far
away on the tomb wall of a pharaoh in
of the Middle Kingdom is a piece of
literature known as the Harper song
written in Egyptian
hieroglyphics it was a song designed to
be sung at funerals and is more than
4,200 years
old at the time of writing his poem oie
mandus Percy Bish shell could not have
known about this piece of ancient
literature since hieroglyphics would not
be conclusively deciphered for several
more years but across the Gulf of four
Millennia he and the unknown author of
this song both describe a human emotion
that is all too familiar the Deep sense
of awe and Melancholy we feel when we
look at ruined places at the crumbling
palaces of long Fallen Emperors at the
tombs of Kings whose age has passed into
dust as you listen imagine the vast Gulf
of time that separates our world from
theirs imagine the sadness of watching
your language forgotten and your cities
crumbled imagine the tombs of ancient
Kings lying opened and robbed the Fallen
pillars of emptied temples half buried
in the sand which shifts and rolls over
the stones as the great disc of the sun
sets red and blazing for a final time on
the Empire of
Egypt one generation passes another
stays behind such has it been since the
men of ancient times the gods of long
ago rest in their pyramids and yet the
great and blessed likewise lie buried in
their
tombs yet those who built great Mansions
their places are no more what has become
of them
all I have heard their words retold time
and
again but where are their dwellings now
their walls are in Ruins and their
places are no more like something that
has never
been there is no return for them to
explain their present state of being to
say how it is with them to Gentle our
hearts until we make our journey to the
place where they have
gone so follow your heart and your
happiness conduct your Affairs on Earth
as your heart
dictates for that day of mourning will
surely come for you so spend your days
joyfully and do not grow weary of
living no man takes his things with him
and none who go can ever come back
again E
[Music]
Harris thank you once again for
listening to the fall of civilizations
podcast I'd like to thank my voice
actors for this episode Alexandra Bolton
laan Lucas Michael hajian Antonis Tom
Marshall Lee Nick Denton Peter Walters
re brignol Lou Millington and Paul
Cassel readings in Arabic were performed
by Nasim El bjui readings in ancient
Egyptian were performed by SE NRA
Muhammad Habib I'd also like to thank my
historical adviser for this episode The
egyptologist Dr Chris nonon you can find
him on social media at
at
chrison you can also read his book
titled Searching for the Lost tombs of
Egypt major sources used in this episode
were the rise and fall of ancient Egypt
by Toby Wilkinson as well as his
writings from ancient Egypt Edward wnter
letters from ancient Egypt Miriam liim's
ancient Egyptian literature the Oxford
history of ancient Egypt edited by Ian
Shaw and Mark vanir's history of ancient
Egypt Abdul Latif Al Al baghdadi's
account of Egypt was translated by Tim
Macintosh Smith a full list of sources
can be found in the description below
and are publicly available on the show's
patreon page as some of you may be aware
fall of civilizations will soon be
available in book form around the world
the book is called fall of civilizations
stories of greatness and decline by me
Paul Cooper it offers the definitive
version of the show
updated expanded and with maps and
images attached the book is coming in
April of 2024 for UK readers and later
in the year for listeners in the United
States please head to fallof
civilizations tocom to find out more
information and for pre-order links
every pre-order helps boost the book's
rankings and supports the show I love to
hear your thoughts and responses on
Twitter so please come and tell me what
you thought you can follow me at Paul mm
Cooper and if you'd like updates about
the podcast announcements about new
episodes as well as images maps and
reading suggestions you can follow the
podcast at fall of civp pod with
underscores separating the words this
podcast can only keep going with the
support of our generous subscribers on
patreon you keep me running you help me
cover my costs and you help keep the
podcast ad free you also let me dedicate
more time to research sear in writing
recording and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as
much life and detail to them as possible
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen if you enjoyed this
episode please consider heading to
patreon.com slof
civilizations podcast or just Google
fallof civilizations patreon that's p a
t r e o n to contribute something and
help help keep the podcast
running for now all the best and thanks
for
listening